Pārājikapāḷi — 1. Pārājikakaṇḍaṃ
vin01m.mul.xml, verses 127-131

[127] For one taking what is not given under six conditions, there is an offence of wrong-doing: he does not perceive it as his own; he is not taking on trust; it is not temporary borrowing; the article is of slight value, a māsaka or less than a māsaka; and a thievish mind is present. If he touches it, there is an offence of wrong-doing. If he makes it shake, there is an offence of wrong-doing. If he shifts it from its place, there is an offence of wrong-doing.

[128] For one taking what is not given under five conditions, there is an offence of wrong-doing: it is not owned by another, but he perceives it as owned by another; the article is of great value, five māsakas or more than five māsakas; and a thievish mind is present. If he touches it, there is an offence of wrong-doing. If he makes it shake, there is an offence of wrong-doing. If he shifts it from its place, there is an offence of wrong-doing.

[129] For one taking what is not given under five conditions, there is an offence of wrong-doing: it is not owned by another, but he perceives it as owned by another; the article is of slight value, more than a māsaka but less than five māsakas; and a thievish mind is present. If he touches it, there is an offence of wrong-doing. If he makes it shake, there is an offence of wrong-doing. If he shifts it from its place, there is an offence of wrong-doing.

[130] For one taking what is not given under five conditions, there is an offence of wrong-doing: it is not owned by another, but he perceives it as owned by another; the article is of slight value, a māsaka or less than a māsaka; and a thievish mind is present. If he touches it, there is an offence of wrong-doing. If he makes it shake, there is an offence of wrong-doing. If he shifts it from its place, there is an offence of wrong-doing.

[131] There is no offence for one who perceives it as his own; in taking on trust; in temporary borrowing; for what is owned by a departed spirit; for what is owned by an animal; for one who perceives it as a rag from a dust-heap; for one who is mad, (for one deranged in mind, for one overwhelmed by pain,) and for the first offender.
