Pārājikapāḷi — 1. Pārājikakaṇḍaṃ
vin01m.mul.xml, verses 132-141

[132] Now at that time the bhikkhus of the group of six went to a dyers' drying-ground and carried off a bundle of the dyers' goods. They had remorse: "The Blessed One has laid down a training rule. Can it be that we have fallen into an offence entailing defeat?" They reported this matter to the Blessed One. "Bhikkhus, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu went to a dyers' drying-ground and, seeing a costly cloth, gave rise to a thievish mind. He had remorse: "The Blessed One has laid down a training rule; can it be that I have fallen into an offence entailing defeat?" He reported this matter to the Blessed One. "There is no offence, bhikkhu, in the mere arising of the thought." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu went to a dyers' drying-ground and, seeing a costly cloth, with thievish mind touched it. He had remorse… "There is no offence entailing defeat, bhikkhu. It is an offence of wrong-doing." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu went to a dyers' drying-ground and, seeing a costly cloth, with thievish mind made it move. He had remorse… "There is no offence entailing defeat, bhikkhu. It is a grave offence." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu went to a dyers' drying-ground and, seeing a costly cloth, with thievish mind shifted it from its place. He had remorse… "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat."

[133] Now at that time a certain bhikkhu who was going for alms, seeing a costly upper covering, gave rise to a thievish mind… with thievish mind touched it… with thievish mind made it move… with thievish mind shifted it from its place. He had remorse… "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat."

[134] Now at that time a certain bhikkhu, having seen goods by day, made a mental note: "I shall carry them off at night." Thinking it was that thing, he carried off that thing… thinking it was that thing, he carried off another… thinking it was another, he carried off that thing… thinking it was another, he carried off another. He had remorse… "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu, having seen goods by day, made a mental note: "I shall carry them off at night." Thinking it was that thing, he carried off his own goods. He had remorse… "There is no offence entailing defeat, bhikkhu. It is an offence of wrong-doing." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu, while carrying another's goods, with thievish mind touched the load on his head… with thievish mind made it move… with thievish mind lowered it to his shoulder… with thievish mind touched the load on his shoulder… with thievish mind made it move… with thievish mind lowered it to his hip… with thievish mind touched the load on his hip… with thievish mind made it move… with thievish mind took it in his hand… with thievish mind set down the load that was in his hand upon the ground… with thievish mind took it up from the ground. He had remorse… "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat."

[135] Now at that time a certain bhikkhu spread out a robe in the open air and entered his dwelling. Another bhikkhu, thinking, "May this robe not be lost," put it away. The first came out and asked that bhikkhu: "Friend, by whom has my robe been carried off?" He replied: "It was carried off by me." "He has taken it: you are not an ascetic!" He had remorse… He reported this matter to the Blessed One. "Bhikkhu, what was your intention?" "I was only using a manner of speaking, Blessed One." "There is no offence, bhikkhu, in a mere manner of speaking." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu, having placed a robe on a chair… having placed a sitting-cloth on a chair… having placed a bowl under a chair, entered his dwelling. Another bhikkhu, thinking, "May this bowl not be lost," put it away. The first came out and asked that bhikkhu: "Friend, by whom has my bowl been carried off?" He replied: "It was carried off by me." "He has taken it: you are not an ascetic!" He had remorse… "There is no offence, bhikkhu, in a mere manner of speaking." Now at that time a certain bhikkhunī spread out a robe on a fence and entered her dwelling. Another bhikkhunī, thinking, "May this robe not be lost," put it away. She came out and asked that bhikkhunī: "Noble lady, by whom has my robe been carried off?" She replied: "It was carried off by me." "She has taken it: you are not an ascetic!" She had remorse. Then that bhikkhunī reported this matter to the bhikkhunīs. The bhikkhunīs reported this matter to the bhikkhus. The bhikkhus reported this matter to the Blessed One… "There is no offence, bhikkhus, in a mere manner of speaking."

[136] Now at that time a certain bhikkhu saw a cloth lifted up by a whirlwind and took it, thinking, "I shall give it to the owners." The owners reproached that bhikkhu: "You are not an ascetic!" He had remorse… "Bhikkhu, what was your intention?" "I had no thievish mind, Blessed One." "There is no offence, bhikkhu, for one without a thievish mind." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu saw a turban lifted up by a whirlwind and, thinking, "Before the owners see it," took it with thievish mind. The owners reproached that bhikkhu: "You are not an ascetic!" He had remorse… "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat."

[137] Now at that time a certain bhikkhu went to a charnel ground and took a rag from a dust-heap from a body that had not yet decomposed. And a departed spirit was dwelling in that body. Then that departed spirit said to the bhikkhu: "Venerable sir, do not take my cloth." That bhikkhu went off paying no heed. Then that body rose up and followed close behind that bhikkhu. Then that bhikkhu entered his dwelling and shut the door. Then that body fell down right there. He had remorse… "There is no offence entailing defeat, bhikkhu. But, bhikkhus, a rag from a dust-heap should not be taken from a body that has not yet decomposed. Whoever should take one commits an offence of wrong-doing."

[138] Now at that time, while robes of the Saṅgha were being distributed, a certain bhikkhu with thievish mind shifted the lot-marker and took a robe. He had remorse… "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat."

[139] Now at that time the venerable Ānanda, in the bath-house, put on another bhikkhu's inner robe, thinking it was his own. Then that bhikkhu said to the venerable Ānanda: "Friend Ānanda, why have you put on my inner robe?" "I perceived it as my own, friend." They reported this matter to the Blessed One. "There is no offence, bhikkhus, for one who perceives it as his own."

[140] Now at that time several bhikkhus coming down from Mount Gijjhakūṭa saw the leavings of a lion's kill, had it cooked, and ate it. They had remorse… "There is no offence, bhikkhus, in the leavings of a lion's kill." Now at that time several bhikkhus coming down from Mount Gijjhakūṭa saw the leavings of a tiger's kill… saw the leavings of a leopard's kill… saw the leavings of a hyena's kill… saw the leavings of a wolf's kill, had it cooked, and ate it. They had remorse… "There is no offence, bhikkhus, in what is owned by an animal."

[141] Now at that time, while the Saṅgha's boiled rice was being distributed, a certain bhikkhu took a share groundlessly, saying, "Give the share for another." He had remorse… "There is no offence entailing defeat, bhikkhu. It is an offence of expiation for deliberate lying." Now at that time, while the Saṅgha's solid food was being distributed… while the Saṅgha's cakes were being distributed… while the Saṅgha's sugarcane was being distributed… while the Saṅgha's timbarūsaka fruits were being distributed, a certain bhikkhu took a share groundlessly, saying, "Give the share for another." He had remorse… "There is no offence entailing defeat, bhikkhu. It is an offence of expiation for deliberate lying."
