Pārājikapāḷi — 1. Pārājikakaṇḍaṃ
vin01m.mul.xml, verses 67-86

[67] Now at that time a certain bhikkhu engaged in sexual intercourse with a female monkey. He became remorseful: "A training rule has been laid down by the Blessed One — have I perhaps fallen into an offence entailing defeat?" He reported the matter to the Blessed One. "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a number of Vesālian bhikkhus of the Vajjī clan engaged in sexual intercourse without having renounced the training and without having declared their weakness. They became remorseful: "A training rule has been laid down by the Blessed One — have we perhaps fallen into an offence entailing defeat?" They reported the matter to the Blessed One. "Bhikkhus, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu, thinking, "In this way there will be no offence for me," engaged in sexual intercourse in the guise of a layman. He became remorseful: "A training rule has been laid down by the Blessed One — have I perhaps fallen into an offence entailing defeat?" He reported the matter to the Blessed One. "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu, thinking, "In this way there will be no offence for me," went naked and engaged in sexual intercourse. He became remorseful … "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu, thinking, "In this way there will be no offence for me," dressed himself in a garment of kusa grass … in a bark-fibre garment … in a garment of wooden planks … in a blanket of human hair … in a blanket of animal hair … in a garment of owls' feathers … in an antelope hide, and engaged in sexual intercourse. He became remorseful … "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu who went for alms saw a little girl lying on a small couch and, being lustful, inserted his thumb into her genital organ. She died. He became remorseful … "Bhikkhu, there is no offence entailing defeat; there is a saṅghādisesa offence."

[68] Now at that time a certain young man's mind was infatuated with the bhikkhunī Uppalavaṇṇā. Then, while the bhikkhunī Uppalavaṇṇā had gone into the village for alms, that young man entered her hut and lay hidden. After her meal, the bhikkhunī Uppalavaṇṇā returned from her alms round, washed her feet, entered the hut and sat down on the bed. Then that young man seized the bhikkhunī Uppalavaṇṇā and violated her. The bhikkhunī Uppalavaṇṇā reported the matter to the bhikkhunīs; the bhikkhunīs reported the matter to the bhikkhus; the bhikkhus reported the matter to the Blessed One. "Bhikkhus, there is no offence for one who does not consent to it."

[69] Now at that time the female sex characteristics appeared in a certain bhikkhu. They reported the matter to the Blessed One. "Bhikkhus, I allow that with that same preceptor, that same ordination and those same years he be joined to the bhikkhunīs. Those offences of bhikkhus which are shared in common with bhikkhunīs are to be cleared in the presence of the bhikkhunīs; as for those offences of bhikkhus which are not shared in common with bhikkhunīs, in respect of those offences there is no offence." Now at that time the male sex characteristics appeared in a certain bhikkhunī. They reported the matter to the Blessed One. "Bhikkhus, I allow that with that same preceptor, that same ordination and those same years she be joined to the bhikkhus. Those offences of bhikkhunīs which are shared in common with bhikkhus are to be cleared in the presence of the bhikkhus; as for those offences of bhikkhunīs which are not shared in common with bhikkhus, in respect of those offences there is no offence."

[70] Now at that time a certain bhikkhu, thinking, "In this way there will be no offence for me," engaged in sexual intercourse with his mother … engaged in sexual intercourse with his daughter … engaged in sexual intercourse with his sister … He became remorseful … "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu engaged in sexual intercourse with his former wife. He became remorseful … "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat."

[71] Now at that time there was a certain bhikkhu with a supple back. Oppressed by discontent, he took his own genital organ into his mouth. He became remorseful … "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time there was a certain bhikkhu with a long member. Oppressed by discontent, he inserted his own genital organ into his own anus. He became remorseful … "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu saw a corpse, and on that corpse there was a wound near the genital organ. Thinking, "In this way there will be no offence for me," he inserted his genital organ into its genital organ and withdrew it through the wound. He became remorseful … "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu saw a corpse, and on that corpse there was a wound near the genital organ. Thinking, "In this way there will be no offence for me," he inserted his genital organ into the wound and withdrew it through the genital organ. He became remorseful … "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu, being lustful, touched with his genital organ the private part of a plaster figure. He became remorseful … "Bhikkhu, there is no offence entailing defeat; there is an offence of wrong-doing." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu, being lustful, touched with his genital organ the private part of a wooden doll. He became remorseful … "Bhikkhu, there is no offence entailing defeat; there is an offence of wrong-doing."

[72] Now at that time a bhikkhu named Sundara, who had gone forth from Rājagaha, was walking along a carriage road. A certain woman said, "Wait a moment, venerable sir, I will pay respects to you," and while paying respects she lifted up his inner robe and took his genital organ into her mouth. He became remorseful … "Did you consent to it, bhikkhu?" "I did not consent, Blessed One." "Bhikkhu, there is no offence for one who does not consent." Now at that time a certain woman, seeing a bhikkhu, said this: "Come, venerable sir, engage in sexual intercourse." "Enough, sister, that is not allowable." "Come, venerable sir, I will make the effort, you make no effort; in this way there will be no offence for you." That bhikkhu did so. He became remorseful … "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain woman, seeing a bhikkhu, said this: "Come, venerable sir, engage in sexual intercourse." "Enough, sister, that is not allowable." "Come, venerable sir, you make the effort, I will make no effort; in this way there will be no offence for you." That bhikkhu did so. He became remorseful … "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain woman, seeing a bhikkhu, said this: "Come, venerable sir, engage in sexual intercourse." "Enough, sister, that is not allowable." "Come, venerable sir, rub inside and release outside … rub outside and release inside; in this way there will be no offence for you." That bhikkhu did so. He became remorseful … "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat."

[73] Now at that time a certain bhikkhu went to a charnel ground, and seeing a corpse that was not decomposed, engaged in sexual intercourse with it. He became remorseful … "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu went to a charnel ground, and seeing a corpse that was for the most part not decomposed, engaged in sexual intercourse with it. He became remorseful … "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu went to a charnel ground, and seeing a corpse that was for the most part decomposed, engaged in sexual intercourse with it. He became remorseful … "Bhikkhu, there is no offence entailing defeat; there is a grave offence." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu went to a charnel ground, and seeing a severed head, inserted his genital organ into its open mouth so that it made contact. He became remorseful … "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu went to a charnel ground, and seeing a severed head, inserted his genital organ into its open mouth without making contact. He became remorseful … "Bhikkhu, there is no offence entailing defeat; there is an offence of wrong-doing." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu's mind was infatuated with a certain woman. She died and was cast away in the cemetery, and her bones lay scattered about. Then that bhikkhu went to the charnel ground, gathered the bones together and applied his genital organ to the private part. He became remorseful … "Bhikkhu, there is no offence entailing defeat; there is an offence of wrong-doing." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu engaged in sexual intercourse with a female nāga … engaged in sexual intercourse with a female yakkha … engaged in sexual intercourse with a female departed spirit … engaged in sexual intercourse with a paṇḍaka. He became remorseful … "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu had lost his faculty of feeling. Thinking, "I feel neither pleasure nor pain, so there will be no offence for me," he engaged in sexual intercourse. They reported the matter to the Blessed One. "Bhikkhus, whether that foolish man felt it or did not feel it, there is an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu, thinking, "I shall engage in sexual intercourse with a woman," felt regret at the mere moment of contact. He became remorseful … "Bhikkhu, there is no offence entailing defeat; there is a saṅghādisesa offence."

[74] Now at that time a certain bhikkhu at Bhaddiya, in the Jātiyā Grove, had gone for his day's rest and lay down. His limbs became stiff with wind. A certain woman saw him, sat down upon his genital organ, took her pleasure as she wished, and departed. The bhikkhus saw the moisture and reported the matter to the Blessed One. "Bhikkhus, the genital organ becomes usable in five ways: through lust, through excrement, through urine, through wind, and through being bitten by caterpillars. In these five ways, bhikkhus, the genital organ becomes usable. It is impossible, bhikkhus, it cannot happen, that that bhikkhu's genital organ became usable through lust. That bhikkhu, bhikkhus, is an arahant. There is no offence, bhikkhus, for that bhikkhu." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu in the Blind Men's Grove at Sāvatthī had gone for his day's rest and lay down. A certain cowherd woman saw him and sat down upon his genital organ. That bhikkhu consented to the entering, consented to its having entered, consented to its remaining, consented to the withdrawing. He became remorseful … "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu in the Blind Men's Grove at Sāvatthī had gone for his day's rest and lay down. A certain goatherd woman saw him … a certain woman gathering firewood saw him … a certain woman gathering cow dung saw him and sat down upon his genital organ. That bhikkhu consented to the entering, consented to its having entered, consented to its remaining, consented to the withdrawing. He became remorseful … "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat."

[75] Now at that time a certain bhikkhu in the Great Wood at Vesālī had gone for his day's rest and lay down. A certain woman saw him, sat down upon his genital organ, took her pleasure as she wished, and stood nearby laughing. That bhikkhu woke up and said this to that woman: "Is this your doing?" "Yes, it is my doing." He became remorseful … "Did you consent to it, bhikkhu?" "I did not know of it, Blessed One." "Bhikkhu, there is no offence for one who does not know."

[76] Now at that time a certain bhikkhu in the Great Wood at Vesālī had gone for his day's rest and lay down leaning against a tree. A certain woman saw him and sat down upon his genital organ. That bhikkhu got up at once. He became remorseful … "Did you consent to it, bhikkhu?" "I did not consent, Blessed One." "Bhikkhu, there is no offence for one who does not consent." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu in the Great Wood at Vesālī had gone for his day's rest and lay down leaning against a tree. A certain woman saw him and sat down upon his genital organ. That bhikkhu pushed her off with his foot and threw her aside. He became remorseful … "Did you consent to it, bhikkhu?" "I did not consent, Blessed One." "Bhikkhu, there is no offence for one who does not consent."

[77] Now at that time a certain bhikkhu in the Great Wood at Vesālī, in the gabled hall, had gone for his day's rest and lay down with the door open. His limbs became stiff with wind. Now at that time a number of women, taking perfume and garlands, came to the park to look at the dwellings. Then those women, seeing that bhikkhu, sat down upon his genital organ, took their pleasure as they wished, and saying, "What a bull of a man this is!" they offered perfume and garlands and departed. The bhikkhus saw the moisture and reported the matter to the Blessed One. "Bhikkhus, the genital organ becomes usable in five ways: through lust, through excrement, through urine, through wind, and through being bitten by caterpillars. In these five ways, bhikkhus, the genital organ becomes usable. It is impossible, bhikkhus, it cannot happen, that that bhikkhu's genital organ became usable through lust. That bhikkhu, bhikkhus, is an arahant. There is no offence, bhikkhus, for that bhikkhu. I allow, bhikkhus, that one who goes into seclusion by day should close the door before going into seclusion."

[78] Now at that time a certain bhikkhu of Bhārukaccha, having engaged in sexual intercourse with his former wife in a dream, thought, "I am no longer a recluse, I shall leave the Order," and while going to Bhārukaccha he saw the venerable Upāli on the way and reported the matter to him. The venerable Upāli said: "There is no offence, friend, in what is done in a dream." Now at that time in Rājagaha there was a lay follower named Supabbā who was devout out of foolishness. She held this view: "A woman who gives sexual intercourse gives the highest gift." Seeing a bhikkhu, she said this: "Come, venerable sir, engage in sexual intercourse." "Enough, sister, that is not allowable." "Come, venerable sir, rub between my thighs; in this way there will be no offence for you." … "Come, venerable sir, rub at my navel … Come, venerable sir, rub at the fold of my belly … Come, venerable sir, rub in my armpit … Come, venerable sir, rub at my neck … Come, venerable sir, rub in my ear-hole … Come, venerable sir, rub in my coil of hair … Come, venerable sir, rub between my fingers … Come, venerable sir, I will make an effort with my hand and cause the emission; in this way there will be no offence for you." That bhikkhu did so. He became remorseful … "Bhikkhu, there is no offence entailing defeat; there is a saṅghādisesa offence."

[79] Now at that time in Sāvatthī there was a lay follower named Saddhā who was devout out of foolishness. She held this view: "A woman who gives sexual intercourse gives the highest gift." Seeing a bhikkhu, she said this: "Come, venerable sir, engage in sexual intercourse." "Enough, sister, that is not allowable." "Come, venerable sir, rub between my thighs … Come, venerable sir, I will make an effort with my hand and cause the emission; in this way there will be no offence for you." That bhikkhu did so. He became remorseful … "Bhikkhu, there is no offence entailing defeat; there is a saṅghādisesa offence."

[80] Now at that time at Vesālī the Licchavi youths seized a bhikkhu and made him commit misconduct with a bhikkhunī … made him commit misconduct with a probationer … made him commit misconduct with a female novice. If both consented, both are to be expelled. If both did not consent, there is no offence for either.

[81] Now at that time at Vesālī the Licchavi youths seized a bhikkhu and made him commit misconduct with a prostitute … made him commit misconduct with a paṇḍaka … made him commit misconduct with a laywoman. If the bhikkhu consented, the bhikkhu is to be expelled. If the bhikkhu did not consent, there is no offence for the bhikkhu. Now at that time at Vesālī the Licchavi youths seized bhikkhus and made them commit misconduct with one another. If both consented, both are to be expelled. If both did not consent, there is no offence for either.

[82] Now at that time a certain bhikkhu who had gone forth in old age went to see his former wife. She said, "Come, venerable sir, leave the Order," and took hold of him. As that bhikkhu drew back, he fell over on his back. She lifted up her clothes and sat down upon his genital organ. He became remorseful … "Did you consent to it, bhikkhu?" "I did not consent, Blessed One." "Bhikkhu, there is no offence for one who does not consent."

[83] Now at that time a certain bhikkhu was dwelling in the forest. A young deer came to the place where he urinated and, while drinking the urine, took his genital organ into its mouth. That bhikkhu consented to it. He became remorseful … "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat."

[84] At that time the Buddha, the Blessed One, was dwelling at Rājagaha on the Vulture's Peak mountain. Now at that time a number of bhikkhus who were acquainted and intimate with one another made grass huts on the slope of Isigili and entered upon the rains residence. The venerable Dhaniya the potter's son also made a grass hut and entered upon the rains residence. Then, when they had completed the rains residence, at the end of the three months those bhikkhus pulled down their grass huts, put away the grass and the wood, and set out on a tour of the countryside. But the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son stayed on in that very place for the rains, and there for the winter, and there for the summer. Then, while the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son had gone into the village for alms, grass-cutters and wood-gatherers pulled down his grass hut and went off taking the grass and the wood. A second time the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son gathered grass and wood and made a grass hut. A second time, while the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son had gone into the village for alms, grass-cutters and wood-gatherers pulled down his grass hut and went off taking the grass and the wood. A third time the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son gathered grass and wood and made a grass hut. A third time, while the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son had gone into the village for alms, grass-cutters and wood-gatherers pulled down his grass hut and went off taking the grass and the wood. Then it occurred to the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son: "Three times now, while I had gone into the village for alms, grass-cutters and wood-gatherers have pulled down my grass hut and gone off taking the grass and the wood. Now I am well trained, accomplished and skilled in my own hereditary craft of pottery, a master of the art. What if I were to knead the clay myself and make a hut entirely of clay?" Then the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son kneaded clay himself, made a hut entirely of clay, gathered grass and wood and cow dung, and fired that hut. That hut was beautiful, lovely, pleasing, and red, like the indagopaka beetle; and the sound of that hut was just like the sound of a little bell.

[85] Then the Blessed One, coming down from the Vulture's Peak mountain together with a number of bhikkhus, saw that hut, beautiful, lovely, pleasing and red. Having seen it, he addressed the bhikkhus: "Bhikkhus, what is that, beautiful, lovely, pleasing, and red like the indagopaka beetle?" Then those bhikkhus reported the matter to the Blessed One. The Buddha, the Blessed One, rebuked him: "Bhikkhus, it is unbecoming of that foolish man, improper, unsuitable, unworthy of a recluse, not allowable, not to be done. How can that foolish man make a hut entirely of clay! Surely that foolish man has no tenderness, no compassion, no non-violence towards living beings! Go, bhikkhus, break down that hut. Let not later generations fall into destroying living beings. And a hut entirely of clay is not to be made, bhikkhus. Whoever should make one, there is an offence of wrong-doing." "Yes, venerable sir," those bhikkhus replied to the Blessed One, and they went to where that hut was; having gone there, they broke down that hut. Then the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son said this to those bhikkhus: "Friends, why are you breaking down my hut?" "The Blessed One, friend, has had it broken down." "Break it down, friends, if the Lord of the Dhamma has had it broken down."

[86] Then it occurred to the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son: "Three times now, while I had gone into the village for alms, grass-cutters and wood-gatherers have pulled down my grass hut and gone off taking the grass and the wood. And the hut entirely of clay that I made has been had broken down by the Blessed One. Now there is the keeper of the timber-yard who is an acquaintance of mine. What if I were to ask the keeper of the timber-yard for timber and make a hut of wood?" Then the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son went to the keeper of the timber-yard; having gone there, he said this to the keeper of the timber-yard: "Three times now, friend, while I had gone into the village for alms, grass-cutters and wood-gatherers have pulled down my grass hut and gone off taking the grass and the wood. And the hut entirely of clay that I made has been had broken down by the Blessed One. Give me timber, friend; I wish to make a hut of wood." "Venerable sir, there is no such timber that I could give to the master. There is, venerable sir, the king's timber, set aside for the repair of the city in case of emergency. If the king gives that timber, have it taken away, venerable sir." "It has been given by the king, friend." Then it occurred to the keeper of the timber-yard: "These recluses, sons of the Sakyans, are conducted according to the Dhamma, of peaceful conduct, living the holy life, speakers of truth, virtuous, of good character. Even the king is greatly devoted to them. It would not be fitting for him to say that what has not been given has been given." Then the keeper of the timber-yard said this to the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son: "Have it taken away, venerable sir." Then the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son had that timber cut up into pieces, had it carried away in carts, and made a hut of wood.
