Pārājikapāḷi — 1. Pārājikakaṇḍaṃ
vin01m.mul.xml, verses 162-171

[162] At that time the Buddha, the Blessed One, was staying at Vesālī, in the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. Now at that time the Blessed One was speaking to the bhikkhus in many ways on the theme of the unattractive, speaking in praise of the unattractive, speaking in praise of the development of the perception of the unattractive, speaking again and again in praise of the attainment based on the unattractive. Then the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus: "Bhikkhus, I wish to go into seclusion for half a month. No one is to approach me except the one who brings the almsfood." "Yes, venerable sir," those bhikkhus replied to the Blessed One, and no one approached the Blessed One except the one who brought the almsfood. The bhikkhus said: "The Blessed One has spoken in many ways on the theme of the unattractive, has spoken in praise of the unattractive, has spoken in praise of the development of the perception of the unattractive, has spoken again and again in praise of the attainment based on the unattractive," and they dwelt devoted to the practice of the development of the perception of the unattractive in its many aspects and modes. They became troubled by their own bodies, ashamed of them, disgusted with them. Just as a woman or a man, young, youthful, fond of adornment, with head freshly washed, would be troubled, ashamed and disgusted if the carcass of a snake or the carcass of a dog or the corpse of a human being were hung around the neck — just so those bhikkhus, being troubled by their own bodies, ashamed of them, disgusted with them, deprived themselves of life, and deprived one another of life, and going up to Migalaṇḍika the sham recluse they said: "It would be good, friend, if you deprived us of life. This bowl and robe shall be yours." Then Migalaṇḍika the sham recluse, hired with bowls and robes, deprived a number of bhikkhus of life, and taking his bloodied sword he went to the river Vaggamudā.

[163] Then, as Migalaṇḍika the sham recluse was washing that bloodied sword, there arose in him remorse and regret: "It is indeed no gain for me, it is no profit for me; it is indeed ill gotten by me, not well gotten by me — much demerit indeed has been produced by me, in that I have deprived of life bhikkhus who were virtuous and of lovely character." Then a certain deity of Māra's host came across the water without breaking it and said this to Migalaṇḍika the sham recluse: "Good, good, worthy man! It is a gain for you, worthy man, it is well gotten by you, worthy man. Much merit indeed has been produced by you, worthy man, in that you have ferried across those who had not crossed over." Then Migalaṇḍika the sham recluse, thinking, "It is a gain for me, it seems; it is well gotten by me, it seems; much merit has been produced by me, it seems; I am ferrying across those who have not crossed over," took his sharp sword and went from dwelling to dwelling, from cell to cell, saying: "Who has not crossed over? Whom shall I ferry across?" Thereupon, in those bhikkhus who were not free from passion there arose at that time fear, there arose terror, there arose horripilation. But in those bhikkhus who were free from passion there arose at that time no fear, no terror, no horripilation. Then Migalaṇḍika the sham recluse deprived one bhikkhu of life in one day, and two bhikkhus of life in one day, and three bhikkhus of life in one day, and four bhikkhus of life in one day, and five bhikkhus of life in one day, and ten bhikkhus of life in one day, and twenty bhikkhus of life in one day, and thirty bhikkhus of life in one day, and forty bhikkhus of life in one day, and fifty bhikkhus of life in one day, and sixty bhikkhus of life in one day.

[164] Then the Blessed One, at the end of that half month, emerged from seclusion and addressed the venerable Ānanda: "Ānanda, how is it that the Saṅgha of bhikkhus seems so diminished?" "It is because, venerable sir, the Blessed One spoke to the bhikkhus in many ways on the theme of the unattractive, spoke in praise of the unattractive, spoke in praise of the development of the perception of the unattractive, spoke again and again in praise of the attainment based on the unattractive. And those bhikkhus, venerable sir, thinking, 'The Blessed One has spoken in many ways on the theme of the unattractive, has spoken in praise of the unattractive, has spoken in praise of the development of the perception of the unattractive, has spoken again and again in praise of the attainment based on the unattractive,' dwelt devoted to the practice of the development of the perception of the unattractive in its many aspects and modes. They became troubled by their own bodies, ashamed of them, disgusted with them. Just as a woman or a man, young, youthful, fond of adornment, with head freshly washed, would be troubled, ashamed and disgusted if the carcass of a snake or the carcass of a dog or the corpse of a human being were hung around the neck — just so those bhikkhus, being troubled by their own bodies, ashamed of them, disgusted with them, deprived themselves of life, and deprived one another of life, and going up to Migalaṇḍika the sham recluse they said: 'It would be good, friend, if you deprived us of life. This bowl and robe shall be yours.' Then, venerable sir, Migalaṇḍika the sham recluse, hired with bowls and robes, deprived one bhikkhu of life in one day … and sixty bhikkhus of life in one day. It would be good, venerable sir, if the Blessed One would explain another method whereby this Saṅgha of bhikkhus might be established in final knowledge." "Well then, Ānanda, assemble in the attendance hall all the bhikkhus who are living in dependence on Vesālī." "Yes, venerable sir," the venerable Ānanda replied to the Blessed One, and having assembled in the attendance hall all the bhikkhus who were living in dependence on Vesālī, he approached the Blessed One; having approached, he said this to the Blessed One: "The Saṅgha of bhikkhus is assembled, venerable sir; let the Blessed One now do as he thinks fit."

[165] Then the Blessed One went to the attendance hall; having gone there, he sat down on the seat made ready. Seated, the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus: "Bhikkhus, this concentration through mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated, is peaceful and sublime, an unadulterated and pleasant abiding, and it makes evil unwholesome states, whenever they arise, vanish and subside at once. Just as, bhikkhus, in the last month of the hot season the dust and dirt that has been thrown up is made to vanish and subside at once by a great unseasonal rain-cloud — just so, bhikkhus, concentration through mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated, is peaceful and sublime, an unadulterated and pleasant abiding, and it makes evil unwholesome states, whenever they arise, vanish and subside at once. And how, bhikkhus, is concentration through mindfulness of breathing developed, how is it cultivated, so that it is peaceful and sublime, an unadulterated and pleasant abiding, and makes evil unwholesome states, whenever they arise, vanish and subside at once? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who has gone to the forest or to the root of a tree or to an empty hut sits down, having folded his legs crosswise, set his body erect, and established mindfulness before him. Just mindful he breathes in, mindful he breathes out. Breathing in long, he understands: 'I breathe in long'; or breathing out long, he understands: 'I breathe out long.' Breathing in short, he understands: 'I breathe in short'; or breathing out short, he understands: 'I breathe out short.' He trains thus: 'Experiencing the whole body, I shall breathe in.' He trains thus: 'Experiencing the whole body, I shall breathe out.' He trains thus: 'Calming the bodily formation, I shall breathe in.' He trains thus: 'Calming the bodily formation, I shall breathe out.' He trains thus: 'Experiencing rapture, I shall breathe in.' He trains thus: 'Experiencing rapture, I shall breathe out.' He trains thus: 'Experiencing pleasure, I shall breathe in.' He trains thus: 'Experiencing pleasure, I shall breathe out.' He trains thus: 'Experiencing the mental formation, I shall breathe in.' He trains thus: 'Experiencing the mental formation, I shall breathe out.' He trains thus: 'Calming the mental formation, I shall breathe in.' He trains thus: 'Calming the mental formation, I shall breathe out.' He trains thus: 'Experiencing the mind, I shall breathe in.' He trains thus: 'Experiencing the mind, I shall breathe out.' 'Gladdening the mind' … 'Concentrating the mind' … 'Liberating the mind' … 'Contemplating impermanence' … 'Contemplating dispassion' … 'Contemplating cessation' … He trains thus: 'Contemplating relinquishment, I shall breathe in.' He trains thus: 'Contemplating relinquishment, I shall breathe out.' Thus developed, bhikkhus, thus cultivated, concentration through mindfulness of breathing is peaceful and sublime, an unadulterated and pleasant abiding, and it makes evil unwholesome states, whenever they arise, vanish and subside at once."

[166] Then the Blessed One, on that occasion and in that connection, had the Saṅgha of bhikkhus assembled and questioned the bhikkhus: "Is it true, bhikkhus, that bhikkhus have deprived themselves of life, and deprived one another of life, and going up to Migalaṇḍika the sham recluse have said: 'It would be good, friend, if you deprived us of life; this bowl and robe shall be yours'?" "It is true, Blessed One." The Buddha, the Blessed One, rebuked them: "It is unbecoming, bhikkhus, of those bhikkhus, unsuitable, improper, unworthy of a recluse, not allowable, not to be done. How can those bhikkhus, bhikkhus, deprive themselves of life, and deprive one another of life, and going up to Migalaṇḍika the sham recluse say: 'It would be good, friend, if you deprived us of life; this bowl and robe shall be yours'? This, bhikkhus, is not for the confidence of those without confidence … And thus, bhikkhus, should you recite this training rule:

[167] "Whatever bhikkhu should intentionally deprive a human being of life, or should look about for a knife-bringer for him, he too is one who has incurred an offence entailing defeat, not in communion." Thus was this training rule laid down by the Blessed One for the bhikkhus.

[168] Now at that time a certain lay follower was ill. His wife was beautiful, good to look upon, charming. The group-of-six bhikkhus became enamoured of that woman. Then it occurred to the group-of-six bhikkhus: "If, friends, that lay follower lives, we shall not get that woman. Come, friends, let us praise the beauty of death to that lay follower." Then the group-of-six bhikkhus went to that lay follower; having gone, they said this to that lay follower: "You, lay follower, have done what is good, have done what is wholesome, have made yourself a shelter from fear; you have done no evil, done nothing cruel, done nothing wicked. Good has been done by you, evil has not been done by you. What use is this evil, miserable life to you? Death is better for you than life. When you have passed away from here, with the breakup of the body after death you will be reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world. There, endowed and provided with the five heavenly strands of sensual pleasure, you will enjoy yourself."

[169] Then that lay follower thought: "What the masters say is true. For I have done what is good, have done what is wholesome, have made myself a shelter from fear; I have done no evil, done nothing cruel, done nothing wicked. Good has been done by me, evil has not been done by me. What use is this evil, miserable life to me? Death is better for me than life. When I have passed away from here, with the breakup of the body after death I shall be reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world. There, endowed and provided with the five heavenly strands of sensual pleasure, I shall enjoy myself." And he ate unsuitable foods, chewed unsuitable things to chew, tasted unsuitable things to taste, drank unsuitable drinks. Because he ate unsuitable foods, chewed unsuitable things to chew, tasted unsuitable things to taste, and drank unsuitable drinks, a severe illness arose in him. He died of that very illness. His wife grumbled, complained, and spread it about: "These recluses, sons of the Sakyans, are shameless, immoral, liars. Yet they will claim to be walkers in the Dhamma, walkers in calm, livers of the holy life, speakers of truth, virtuous, of lovely character! There is no recluseship in them, there is no brahminhood in them; their recluseship is lost, their brahminhood is lost; whence recluseship in them, whence brahminhood in them? They have fallen away from recluseship, they have fallen away from brahminhood. These men praised the beauty of death to my husband. By these men my husband has been killed." Other people too grumbled, complained, and spread it about: "These recluses, sons of the Sakyans, are shameless, immoral, liars. Yet they will claim to be walkers in the Dhamma, walkers in calm, livers of the holy life, speakers of truth, virtuous, of lovely character! There is no recluseship in them, there is no brahminhood in them; their recluseship is lost, their brahminhood is lost; whence recluseship in them, whence brahminhood in them? They have fallen away from recluseship, they have fallen away from brahminhood. These men praised the beauty of death to the lay follower. By these men the lay follower has been killed." The bhikkhus heard those people grumbling, complaining, and spreading it about. Those bhikkhus who were of few wishes … grumbled, complained, and spread it about: "How can the group-of-six bhikkhus praise the beauty of death to a lay follower?"

[170] Then those bhikkhus, having rebuked the group-of-six bhikkhus in many ways, reported the matter to the Blessed One … "Is it true, bhikkhus, that you praised the beauty of death to a lay follower?" "It is true, Blessed One." The Buddha, the Blessed One, rebuked them: "It is unbecoming, foolish men, unsuitable, improper, unworthy of a recluse, not allowable, not to be done. How can you, foolish men, praise the beauty of death to a lay follower? This, foolish men, is not for the confidence of those without confidence … And thus, bhikkhus, should you recite this training rule:

[171] "Whatever bhikkhu should intentionally deprive a human being of life, or should look about for a knife-bringer for him, or should praise the beauty of death, or should incite him to death, saying: 'Good man, what use is this evil, miserable life to you? Death is better for you than life' — thus minded and intending, in many ways praising the beauty of death or inciting to death: he too is one who has incurred an offence entailing defeat, not in communion."
