Pārājikapāḷi — Verañjakaṇḍaṃ
vin01m.mul.xml, verses 21-23

[21] Then the venerable Sāriputta rose from his seat, arranged his upper robe over one shoulder, extended his hands in reverential salutation toward the Blessed One, and said to the Blessed One: "This is the time, Blessed One! This is the time, Well-Farer! Let the Blessed One lay down training rules for the disciples and recite the Pātimokkha, so that this holy life may endure and last long." — "Wait, Sāriputta! Wait, Sāriputta! The Tathāgata himself will know the time for that. The Teacher does not lay down training rules for the disciples nor recite the Pātimokkha so long as certain things that are the basis for the taints have not appeared here in the Saṅgha. But when certain things that are the basis for the taints do appear here in the Saṅgha, then the Teacher lays down training rules for the disciples and recites the Pātimokkha, for the sake of warding off those very things that are the basis for the taints. Certain things that are the basis for the taints do not appear here in the Saṅgha, Sāriputta, so long as the Saṅgha has not attained greatness in long standing. But when the Saṅgha has attained greatness in long standing, then certain things that are the basis for the taints appear here in the Saṅgha, and then the Teacher lays down training rules for the disciples and recites the Pātimokkha, for the sake of warding off those very things that are the basis for the taints. Certain things that are the basis for the taints do not appear here in the Saṅgha, Sāriputta, so long as the Saṅgha has not attained greatness in extent. But when the Saṅgha has attained greatness in extent, then certain things that are the basis for the taints appear here in the Saṅgha, and then the Teacher lays down training rules for the disciples and recites the Pātimokkha, for the sake of warding off those very things that are the basis for the taints. Certain things that are the basis for the taints do not appear here in the Saṅgha, Sāriputta, so long as the Saṅgha has not attained greatness in the height of gain. But when the Saṅgha has attained greatness in the height of gain, then certain things that are the basis for the taints appear here in the Saṅgha, and then the Teacher lays down training rules for the disciples and recites the Pātimokkha, for the sake of warding off those very things that are the basis for the taints. Certain things that are the basis for the taints do not appear here in the Saṅgha, Sāriputta, so long as the Saṅgha has not attained greatness in learning. But when the Saṅgha has attained greatness in learning, then certain things that are the basis for the taints appear here in the Saṅgha, and then the Teacher lays down training rules for the disciples and recites the Pātimokkha, for the sake of warding off those very things that are the basis for the taints. For the Saṅgha of monks, Sāriputta, is free of canker, free of danger, without blemish, pure, established in the essence. Of these five hundred monks, Sāriputta, even the last is a stream-enterer, not liable to fall into states of woe, fixed in destiny, bound for full awakening."

[22] Then the Blessed One addressed the venerable Ānanda: "It is the custom of Tathāgatas, Ānanda, not to depart on a journey through the countryside without taking leave of those by whom they were invited to spend the rains. Come, Ānanda, let us take leave of the brahmin of Verañjā." — "Yes, venerable sir," the venerable Ānanda replied to the Blessed One. Then the Blessed One dressed, took his bowl and robe, and with the venerable Ānanda as his attendant went to the dwelling of the brahmin of Verañjā; having gone there, he sat down on the seat prepared for him. Then the brahmin of Verañjā approached the Blessed One; having approached and paid homage to the Blessed One, he sat down to one side. The Blessed One said this to the brahmin of Verañjā, seated to one side: "We were invited by you, brahmin, and we have spent the rains; we now take our leave of you, for we wish to set out on a journey through the countryside." — "It is true, Master Gotama, that you were invited by me and have spent the rains; but the gift that ought to have been given was not given. And that was not because there was nothing, nor from unwillingness to give — but how could it be otherwise, since household life has many duties, many things to be done? May Master Gotama consent to accept a meal from me tomorrow together with the Saṅgha of monks." The Blessed One consented by silence. Then the Blessed One, having instructed, roused, inspired and gladdened the brahmin of Verañjā with a talk on the Dhamma, rose from his seat and departed. Then, when that night had passed, the brahmin of Verañjā had excellent food, both hard and soft, prepared in his own dwelling, and had the time announced to the Blessed One: "It is time, Master Gotama, the meal is ready."

[23] Then the Blessed One, having dressed in the morning, took his bowl and robe and went to the dwelling of the brahmin of Verañjā; having gone there, he sat down together with the Saṅgha of monks on the seat prepared for him. Then the brahmin of Verañjā with his own hands served and satisfied the Saṅgha of monks with the Buddha at its head with excellent food, both hard and soft; and when the Blessed One had eaten and had removed his hand from the bowl, he clothed him with a set of three robes, and clothed each single monk with a single pair of cloths. Then the Blessed One, having instructed, roused, inspired and gladdened the brahmin of Verañjā with a talk on the Dhamma, rose from his seat and departed. Then the Blessed One, having stayed at Verañjā as long as he wished, went — not going by way of Soreyya, Saṅkassa and Kaṇṇakujja — to Payāgapatiṭṭhāna; and having arrived there, he crossed the river Ganges at Payāgapatiṭṭhāna and came down to Bārāṇasī. Then the Blessed One, having stayed at Bārāṇasī as long as he wished, set out on a journey toward Vesālī. Journeying by stages, he arrived at Vesālī. There the Blessed One stayed at Vesālī in the Great Wood, in the Hall with the Peaked Roof.

----------------------------------------
Original (Pali, IAST):

[21] Atha kho āyasmā sāriputto uṭṭhāyāsanā ekaṃsaṃ uttarāsaṅgaṃ karitvā yena bhagavā tenañjaliṃ paṇāmetvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘etassa, bhagavā, kālo! Etassa, sugata, kālo! Yaṃ bhagavā sāvakānaṃ sikkhāpadaṃ paññapeyya , uddiseyya pātimokkhaṃ, yathayidaṃ brahmacariyaṃ addhaniyaṃ assa ciraṭṭhitika’’nti. ‘‘Āgamehi tvaṃ, sāriputta! Āgamehi tvaṃ, sāriputta! Tathāgatova tattha kālaṃ jānissati. Na tāva, sāriputta, satthā sāvakānaṃ sikkhāpadaṃ paññapeti uddisati pātimokkhaṃ yāva na idhekacce āsavaṭṭhānīyā dhammā saṅghe pātubhavanti. Yato ca kho, sāriputta, idhekacce āsavaṭṭhānīyā dhammā saṅghe pātubhavanti, atha satthā sāvakānaṃ sikkhāpadaṃ paññapeti uddissati pātimokkhaṃ tesaṃyeva āsavaṭṭhānīyānaṃ dhammānaṃ paṭighātāya. Na tāva, sāriputta, idhekacce āsavaṭṭhānīyā dhammā saṅghe pātubhavanti yāva na saṅgho rattaññumahattaṃ patto hoti. Yato ca kho, sāriputta, saṅgho rattaññumahattaṃ patto hoti atha idhekacce āsavaṭṭhānīyā dhammā saṅghe pātubhavanti, atha, satthā sāvakānaṃ sikkhāpadaṃ paññapeti uddisati pātimokkhaṃ tesaṃyeva āsavaṭṭhānīyānaṃ dhammānaṃ paṭighātāya. Na tāva, sāriputta, idhekacce āsavaṭṭhānīyā dhammā saṅghe pātubhavanti, yāva na saṅgho vepullamahattaṃ patto hoti. Yato ca kho, sāriputta, saṅgho vepullamahattaṃ patto hoti, atha idhekacce āsavaṭṭhānīyā dhammā saṅghe pātubhavanti, atha satthā sāvakānaṃ sikkhāpadaṃ paññapeti uddisati pātimokkhaṃ tesaṃyeva āsavaṭṭhānīyānaṃ dhammānaṃ paṭighātāya. Na tāva, sāriputta, idhekacce āsavaṭṭhānīyā dhammā saṅghe pātubhavanti, yāva na saṅgho lābhaggamahattaṃ patto hoti. Yato ca kho, sāriputta, saṅgho lābhaggamahattaṃ patto hoti, atha idhekacce āsavaṭṭhānīyā dhammā saṅghe pātubhavanti, atha satthā sāvakānaṃ sikkhāpadaṃ paññapeti uddisati pātimokkhaṃ tesaṃyeva āsavaṭṭhānīyānaṃ dhammānaṃ paṭighātāya. Na tāva, sāriputta, idhekacce āsavaṭṭhānīyā dhammā saṅghe pātubhavanti, yāva na saṅgho bāhusaccamahattaṃ patto hoti. Yato ca kho, sāriputta, saṅgho bāhusaccamahattaṃ patto hoti, atha idhekacce āsavaṭṭhānīyā dhammā saṅghe pātubhavanti, atha satthā sāvakānaṃ sikkhāpadaṃ paññapeti uddisati pātimokkhaṃ tesaṃyeva āsavaṭṭhānīyānaṃ dhammānaṃ paṭighātāya. Nirabbudo hi, sāriputta, bhikkhusaṅgho nirādīnavo apagatakāḷako suddho sāre patiṭṭhito. Imesañhi, sāriputta, pañcannaṃ bhikkhusatānaṃ yo pacchimako bhikkhu so sotāpanno avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo’’ti.

[22] Atha kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ āmantesi – ‘‘āciṇṇaṃ kho panetaṃ, ānanda, tathāgatānaṃ yehi nimantitā vassaṃ vasanti, na te anapaloketvā janapadacārikaṃ pakkamanti. Āyāmānanda, verañjaṃ brāhmaṇaṃ apalokessāmā’’ti. ‘‘Evaṃ bhante’’ti kho āyasmā ānando bhagavato paccassosi. Atha kho bhagavā nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya āyasmatā ānandena pacchāsamaṇena yena verañjassa brāhmaṇassa nivesanaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi. Atha kho verañjo brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnaṃ kho verañjaṃ brāhmaṇaṃ bhagavā etadavoca – ‘‘nimantitamha tayā, brāhmaṇa, vassaṃvuṭṭhā , apalokema taṃ, icchāma mayaṃ janapadacārikaṃ pakkamitu’’nti. ‘‘Saccaṃ, bho gotama, nimantitattha mayā vassaṃvuṭṭhā; api ca, yo deyyadhammo so na dinno. Tañca kho no asantaṃ, nopi adātukamyatā, taṃ kutettha labbhā bahukiccā gharāvāsā bahukaraṇīyā. Adhivāsetu me bhavaṃ gotamo svātanāya bhattaṃ saddhiṃ bhikkhusaṅghenā’’ti. Adhivāsesi bhagavā tuṇhībhāvena. Atha kho bhagavā verañjaṃ brāhmaṇaṃ dhammiyā kathāya sandassetvā samādapetvā samuttejetvā sampahaṃsetvā uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkāmi. Atha kho verañjo brāhmaṇo tassā rattiyā accayena sake nivesane paṇītaṃ khādanīyaṃ bhojanīyaṃ paṭiyādāpetvā bhagavato kālaṃ ārocāpesi – ‘‘kālo, bho gotama, niṭṭhitaṃ bhatta’’nti.

[23] Atha kho bhagavā pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena verañjassa brāhmaṇassa nivesanaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi saddhiṃ bhikkhusaṅghena. Atha kho verañjo brāhmaṇo buddhappamukhaṃ bhikkhusaṅghaṃ paṇītena khādanīyena bhojanīyena sahatthā santappetvā sampavāretvā bhagavantaṃ bhuttāviṃ onītapattapāṇiṃ ticīvarena acchādesi, ekamekañca bhikkhuṃ ekamekena dussayugena acchādesi. Atha kho bhagavā verañjaṃ brāhmaṇaṃ dhammiyā kathāya sandassetvā samādapetvā samuttejetvā sampahaṃsetvā uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkāmi. Atha kho bhagavā verañjāyaṃ yathābhirantaṃ viharitvā anupagamma soreyyaṃ saṅkassaṃ kaṇṇakujjaṃ yena payāgapatiṭṭhānaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā payāgapatiṭṭhāne gaṅgaṃ nadiṃ uttaritvā yena bārāṇasī tadavasari. Atha kho bhagavā bārāṇasiyaṃ yathābhirantaṃ viharitvā yena vesālī tena cārikaṃ pakkāmi. Anupubbena cārikaṃ caramāno yena vesālī tadavasari. Tatra sudaṃ bhagavā vesāliyaṃ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyanti.
