Pārājikapāḷi — 1. Pārājikakaṇḍaṃ
vin01m.mul.xml, verses 24-43

[24] Now at that time, not far from Vesālī there was a village named Kalanda. There lived Sudinna, son of Kalanda, the son of a wealthy merchant. Then Sudinna the Kalanda-son went to Vesālī together with a number of companions on some business or other. Now at that time the Blessed One was seated teaching the Dhamma, surrounded by a great assembly. Sudinna the Kalanda-son saw the Blessed One seated teaching the Dhamma surrounded by a great assembly, and on seeing him he thought: "What if I too were to listen to the Dhamma?" Then Sudinna the Kalanda-son approached that assembly, and having approached, he sat down to one side. As he was sitting to one side, this thought occurred to him: "As I understand the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One, it is not easy for one dwelling at home to live the holy life utterly perfect, utterly pure, polished like a conch. What if I were to shave off my hair and beard, put on the ochre robes, and go forth from home into homelessness?" Then that assembly, having been instructed, roused, inspired, and gladdened by the Blessed One with a talk on the Dhamma, rose from their seats, paid homage to the Blessed One, circumambulated him keeping him on the right, and departed.

[25] Then Sudinna the Kalanda-son, soon after the assembly had risen, approached the Blessed One; having approached, he paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down to one side. Sitting to one side, Sudinna the Kalanda-son said to the Blessed One: "Venerable sir, as I understand the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One, it is not easy for one dwelling at home to live the holy life utterly perfect, utterly pure, polished like a conch. I wish, venerable sir, to shave off my hair and beard, put on the ochre robes, and go forth from home into homelessness. Let the Blessed One give me the going forth." — "But, Sudinna, have you been permitted by your mother and father to go forth from home into homelessness?" — "No, venerable sir, I have not been permitted by my mother and father to go forth from home into homelessness." — "Sudinna, Tathāgatas do not give the going forth to a son who has not been permitted by his mother and father." — "Then, venerable sir, I shall act in such a way that my mother and father will permit me to go forth from home into homelessness."

[26] Then Sudinna the Kalanda-son, having finished his business in Vesālī, went to Kalanda village, to his mother and father; having approached, he said to his mother and father: "Mother, father, as I understand the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One, it is not easy for one dwelling at home to live the holy life utterly perfect, utterly pure, polished like a conch. I wish to shave off my hair and beard, put on the ochre robes, and go forth from home into homelessness. Permit me to go forth from home into homelessness." When this was said, the mother and father of Sudinna the Kalanda-son said to him: "But you, dear Sudinna, are our only son, dear and beloved to us, raised in comfort and cared for in comfort. You, dear Sudinna, know nothing of suffering. Even by death we shall be parted from you against our will — how then should we permit you, while you are alive, to go forth from home into homelessness?" A second time Sudinna the Kalanda-son said to his mother and father: "Mother, father, as I understand the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One, it is not easy for one dwelling at home to live the holy life utterly perfect, utterly pure, polished like a conch. I wish to shave off my hair and beard, put on the ochre robes, and go forth from home into homelessness. Permit me to go forth from home into homelessness." A second time the mother and father of Sudinna the Kalanda-son said to him: "But you, dear Sudinna, are our only son, dear and beloved to us, raised in comfort and cared for in comfort. You, dear Sudinna, know nothing of suffering. Even by death we shall be parted from you against our will — how then should we permit you, while you are alive, to go forth from home into homelessness!" A third time Sudinna the Kalanda-son said to his mother and father: "Mother, father, as I understand the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One, it is not easy for one dwelling at home to live the holy life utterly perfect, utterly pure, polished like a conch. I wish to shave off my hair and beard, put on the ochre robes, and go forth from home into homelessness. Permit me to go forth from home into homelessness." A third time the mother and father of Sudinna the Kalanda-son said to him: "But you, dear Sudinna, are our only son, dear and beloved to us, raised in comfort and cared for in comfort. You, dear Sudinna, know nothing of suffering. Even by death we shall be parted from you against our will — how then should we permit you, while you are alive, to go forth from home into homelessness!"

[27] Then Sudinna the Kalanda-son, thinking, "My mother and father will not permit me to go forth from home into homelessness," lay down right there on the bare ground, saying: "Right here there will be either death for me, or the going forth." And Sudinna the Kalanda-son did not eat one meal, did not eat two meals, did not eat three meals, did not eat four meals, did not eat five meals, did not eat six meals, did not eat seven meals.

[28] Then the mother and father of Sudinna the Kalanda-son said to him: "But you, dear Sudinna, are our only son, dear and beloved to us, raised in comfort and cared for in comfort. You, dear Sudinna, know nothing of suffering. Even by death we shall be parted from you against our will — how then should we permit you, while you are alive, to go forth from home into homelessness? Get up, dear Sudinna! Eat and drink and enjoy yourself; eating, drinking, and enjoying yourself, delight in indulging in sensual pleasures and in making merit. We do not permit you to go forth from home into homelessness." When this was said, Sudinna the Kalanda-son remained silent. A second time... and a third time the mother and father of Sudinna the Kalanda-son said to him: "But you, dear Sudinna, are our only son, dear and beloved to us, raised in comfort and cared for in comfort. You, dear Sudinna, know nothing of suffering. Even by death we shall be parted from you against our will — how then should we permit you, while you are alive, to go forth from home into homelessness! Get up, dear Sudinna! Eat and drink and enjoy yourself; eating, drinking, and enjoying yourself, delight in indulging in sensual pleasures and in making merit. We do not permit you to go forth from home into homelessness." A third time Sudinna the Kalanda-son remained silent. Then the companions of Sudinna the Kalanda-son approached him; having approached, they said to him: "But you, friend Sudinna, are your mother's and father's only son, dear and beloved, raised in comfort and cared for in comfort. You, friend Sudinna, know nothing of suffering. Even by death your mother and father will be parted from you against their will — how then will they permit you, while you are alive, to go forth from home into homelessness! Get up, friend Sudinna! Eat and drink and enjoy yourself; eating, drinking, and enjoying yourself, delight in indulging in sensual pleasures and in making merit. Your mother and father will not permit you to go forth from home into homelessness." When this was said, Sudinna the Kalanda-son remained silent. A second time... and a third time the companions of Sudinna the Kalanda-son said to him: "But you, friend Sudinna..." And a third time Sudinna the Kalanda-son remained silent.

[29] Then the companions of Sudinna the Kalanda-son went to his mother and father; having approached, they said to them: "Mother, father, this Sudinna is lying on the bare ground, saying: 'Right here there will be either death for me, or the going forth.' If you do not permit Sudinna to go forth from home into homelessness, he will simply die right there. But if you permit Sudinna to go forth from home into homelessness, you will still see him even after he has gone forth. And if Sudinna does not find delight in going forth from home into homelessness, what other destination will there be for him? He will come back here. Permit Sudinna to go forth from home into homelessness." — "We permit Sudinna, dears, to go forth from home into homelessness." Then the companions of Sudinna the Kalanda-son went to him and said: "Get up, friend Sudinna! You have been permitted by your mother and father to go forth from home into homelessness."

[30] Then Sudinna the Kalanda-son, thinking, "It seems I have been permitted by my mother and father to go forth from home into homelessness," delighted and elated, rose up, brushing his limbs with his hand. Then, after a few days spent regaining his strength, Sudinna the Kalanda-son approached the Blessed One; having approached, he paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down to one side. Sitting to one side, Sudinna the Kalanda-son said to the Blessed One: "Venerable sir, I have been permitted by my mother and father to go forth from home into homelessness. Let the Blessed One give me the going forth." And Sudinna the Kalanda-son received the going forth in the presence of the Blessed One, and he received the higher ordination. Not long after his higher ordination, the venerable Sudinna undertook and practised such ascetic qualities as these: he was a forest-dweller, an alms-food eater, a rag-robe wearer, one who went on uninterrupted alms round; and he dwelt in dependence on a certain Vajjian village. Now at that time the Vajjian country was suffering famine, hard to live in, with crops blighted white and turned to straw, with food distributed by tickets, so that it was not easy to keep going by gleaning and by favours. Then this thought occurred to the venerable Sudinna: "At present the Vajjian country is suffering famine, hard to live in, with crops blighted white and turned to straw, with food distributed by tickets, and it is not easy to keep going by gleaning and by favours. But I have many relatives in Vesālī who are rich, of great wealth, of great possessions, with abundant gold and silver, abundant means and resources, abundant wealth and grain. What if I were to dwell in dependence on my relatives? My relatives, depending on me, will give gifts and make merit; the bhikkhus will obtain gains; and I shall not be troubled about alms-food." Then the venerable Sudinna set his lodging in order, took his bowl and robe, and set out for Vesālī. Travelling by stages he arrived at Vesālī. There the venerable Sudinna stayed near Vesālī in the Great Wood, in the Hall with the Peaked Roof. The venerable Sudinna's relatives heard: "It seems Sudinna the Kalanda-son has arrived in Vesālī." They brought the venerable Sudinna a gift of food consisting of some sixty pots of cooked rice. Then the venerable Sudinna made over those sixty pots of food to the bhikkhus, and in the morning he dressed, took his bowl and robe, and entered Kalanda village for alms. Walking for alms without skipping houses in Kalanda village, he came to his own father's house.

[31] Now at that time a slave-woman of the venerable Sudinna's family wished to throw away some stale gruel from the previous evening. Then the venerable Sudinna said to that family slave-woman: "Sister, if that is to be thrown away, pour it here into my bowl." Then, as the venerable Sudinna's family slave-woman was pouring that stale gruel into the venerable Sudinna's bowl, she recognized the marks of his hands and feet and the sound of his voice. Then the venerable Sudinna's family slave-woman went to the venerable Sudinna's mother; having approached, she said to her: "Please know, my lady: the young master Sudinna has arrived." — "If, my girl, you are speaking the truth, I make you a free woman."

[32] Now at that time the venerable Sudinna was eating that stale gruel leaning against a certain wall. And the venerable Sudinna's father, coming back from work, saw the venerable Sudinna eating that stale gruel leaning against a certain wall. Having seen him, he approached the venerable Sudinna and said to him: "Is it possible, dear Sudinna, that you are eating stale gruel! Surely, dear Sudinna, you should go to your own home?" — "I did go to your house, householder. This stale gruel came from there." Then the venerable Sudinna's father took the venerable Sudinna by the arm and said to him: "Come, dear Sudinna, let us go to the house." Then the venerable Sudinna went to his own father's house; having gone there, he sat down on the seat prepared for him. Then the venerable Sudinna's father said to him: "Eat, dear Sudinna." — "Enough, householder, my meal has been taken today." — "Then consent, dear Sudinna, to tomorrow's meal." The venerable Sudinna consented by silence. Then the venerable Sudinna rose from his seat and departed.

[33] Then, when the night had passed, the venerable Sudinna's mother had the ground smeared with fresh cow dung and had two heaps made: one of coined money, one of gold. So large were those heaps that a man standing on this side could not see a man standing on the other side, and a man standing on the other side could not see a man standing on this side. She had those heaps covered with mats, had a seat prepared in the middle, had it surrounded with a screen, and then addressed the venerable Sudinna's former wife: "Now then, daughter-in-law, adorn yourself with the ornaments with which you were adorned when you were dear and beloved to my son Sudinna." — "Yes, my lady," the venerable Sudinna's former wife replied to the venerable Sudinna's mother.

[34] Then the venerable Sudinna dressed in the morning, took his bowl and robe, and went to his own father's house; having gone there, he sat down on the seat prepared for him. Then the venerable Sudinna's father approached the venerable Sudinna; having approached, he had the heaps uncovered and said to the venerable Sudinna: "Dear Sudinna, this is your mother's property, her woman's dowry; other is your father's, other is your grandfather's. It is possible, dear Sudinna, to return to the lower life and both enjoy wealth and make merit. Come, dear Sudinna, return to the lower life, enjoy wealth and make merit." — "Father, I am not able, I do not dare; I delight in living the holy life." A second time... and a third time the venerable Sudinna's father said to him: "Dear Sudinna, this is your mother's property, her woman's dowry; other is your father's, other is your grandfather's. It is possible, dear Sudinna, to return to the lower life and both enjoy wealth and make merit. Come, dear Sudinna, return to the lower life, enjoy wealth and make merit." — "I would say something to you, householder, if you would not take it amiss." — "Speak, dear Sudinna." — "Then, householder, have large hempen sacks made, fill them with the coined money and gold, cart them away, and dump them in the middle of the current of the Ganges. Why is that? Because, householder, on account of this wealth there will come to you fear or trembling or terror or the need for guarding — and these will no longer be yours." When this was said, the venerable Sudinna's father was displeased: "How can my son Sudinna speak thus!"

[35] Then the venerable Sudinna's father addressed the venerable Sudinna's former wife: "Now then, daughter-in-law, you are dear and beloved to him. Perhaps my son Sudinna will do what you say!" Then the venerable Sudinna's former wife clasped the venerable Sudinna's feet and said to him: "What are they like, my lord, those nymphs for whose sake you live the holy life?" — "Sister, it is not for the sake of nymphs that I live the holy life." Then the venerable Sudinna's former wife, thinking, "From today my lord Sudinna addresses me with the word 'sister'," fainted and fell down right there. Then the venerable Sudinna said to his father: "Householder, if food is to be given, give it; do not harass us." — "Eat, dear Sudinna." Then the venerable Sudinna's mother and father with their own hands served and satisfied the venerable Sudinna with excellent food, both hard and soft. Then, when the venerable Sudinna had eaten and had withdrawn his hand from the bowl, his mother said to him: "Dear Sudinna, this family is rich, of great wealth, of great possessions, with abundant gold and silver, abundant means and resources, abundant wealth and grain. It is possible, dear Sudinna, to return to the lower life and both enjoy wealth and make merit. Come, dear Sudinna, return to the lower life, enjoy wealth and make merit." — "Mother, I am not able, I do not dare; I delight in living the holy life." A second time... and a third time the venerable Sudinna's mother said to him: "Dear Sudinna, this family is rich, of great wealth, of great possessions, with abundant gold and silver, abundant means and resources, abundant wealth and grain. Well then, dear Sudinna, give us at least an offspring — do not let the Licchavis carry off our property as heirless!" — "Mother, that I can do." — "But where, dear Sudinna, are you now staying?" — "In the Great Wood, mother." Then the venerable Sudinna rose from his seat and departed.

[36] Then the venerable Sudinna's mother addressed the venerable Sudinna's former wife: "Now then, daughter-in-law, when you are in season and your flowers have appeared, tell me." — "Yes, my lady," the venerable Sudinna's former wife replied to the venerable Sudinna's mother. Then before long the venerable Sudinna's former wife came into season, and her flowers appeared. Then the venerable Sudinna's former wife said to the venerable Sudinna's mother: "My lady, I am in season, my flowers have appeared." — "Then, daughter-in-law, adorn yourself with the ornaments with which you were adorned when you were dear and beloved to my son Sudinna." — "Yes, my lady," the venerable Sudinna's former wife replied to the venerable Sudinna's mother. Then the venerable Sudinna's mother, taking the venerable Sudinna's former wife with her, went to the Great Wood, to the venerable Sudinna; having approached, she said to the venerable Sudinna: "Dear Sudinna, this family is rich, of great wealth, of great possessions, with abundant gold and silver, abundant means and resources, abundant wealth and grain. It is possible, dear Sudinna, to return to the lower life and both enjoy wealth and make merit. Come, dear Sudinna, return to the lower life, enjoy wealth and make merit." — "Mother, I am not able, I do not dare; I delight in living the holy life." A second time... and a third time the venerable Sudinna's mother said to him: "Dear Sudinna, this family is rich, of great wealth, of great possessions, with abundant gold and silver, abundant means and resources, abundant wealth and grain. Well then, dear Sudinna, give us at least an offspring — do not let the Licchavis carry off our property as heirless!" — "Mother, that I can do." And taking his former wife by the arm, he plunged into the Great Wood, and — since the training rule had not yet been laid down and he saw no danger in it — he had sexual intercourse with his former wife three times. And by that she conceived. The earth-dwelling deities raised a cry: "Sirs, the Saṅgha of bhikkhus was free of tumour, free of danger; but by Sudinna the Kalanda-son a tumour has been produced, a danger has been produced!" Hearing the cry of the earth-dwelling deities, the deities of the Four Great Kings raised a cry... the Tāvatiṃsa deities... the Yāma deities... the Tusita deities... the Nimmānaratī deities... the Paranimmitavasavattī deities... the deities of Brahmā's retinue raised a cry: "Sirs, the Saṅgha of bhikkhus was free of tumour, free of danger; but by Sudinna the Kalanda-son a tumour has been produced, a danger has been produced!" Thus in that moment, in that instant, the cry spread as far as the Brahmā world. Then the venerable Sudinna's former wife, when her pregnancy came to term, gave birth to a son. And the venerable Sudinna's companions gave that boy the name "Bījaka" (Seedling); they gave the venerable Sudinna's former wife the name "Bījaka's mother"; and they gave the venerable Sudinna the name "Bījaka's father." Later on both of them went forth from home into homelessness and realized arahantship.

[37] Then remorse and regret arose in the venerable Sudinna: "It is indeed a loss for me, it is no gain for me! It is indeed ill-gotten by me, it is not well-gotten by me — that I, having gone forth in such a well-proclaimed Dhamma and Discipline, was unable for life to practise the holy life complete and pure." Through that very remorse and regret he became thin, wretched, of poor complexion, growing more and more sallow, with veins standing out on his limbs, inwardly brooding, downcast, miserable, dejected, remorseful, and he languished.

[38] Then the bhikkhus who were the venerable Sudinna's companions said to him: "Formerly, friend Sudinna, you were handsome, with full faculties, with a clear countenance and a bright complexion; but now you are thin, wretched, of poor complexion, growing more and more sallow, with veins standing out on your limbs, inwardly brooding, downcast, miserable, dejected, remorseful, and languishing. Surely, friend Sudinna, you are not living the holy life without delight?" — "It is not, friends, that I live the holy life without delight. I have done an evil deed: I have had sexual intercourse with my former wife. Thus, friends, remorse and regret arose in me: 'It is indeed a loss for me, it is no gain for me; it is indeed ill-gotten by me, it is not well-gotten by me — that I, having gone forth in such a well-proclaimed Dhamma and Discipline, was unable for life to practise the holy life complete and pure.'" — "Indeed, friend Sudinna, it is enough for remorse, enough for regret, that you, having gone forth in such a well-proclaimed Dhamma and Discipline, were not able for life to practise the holy life complete and pure. Has not the Blessed One, friend, in many ways taught the Dhamma for dispassion, not for passion; for detachment, not for attachment; for non-clinging, not for clinging? Yet there, friend, when the Blessed One has taught the Dhamma for dispassion, you incline to passion; when he has taught the Dhamma for detachment, you incline to attachment; when he has taught the Dhamma for non-clinging, you incline to clinging! Has not the Blessed One, friend, in many ways taught the Dhamma for the fading away of lust, for the subduing of intoxication, for the removal of thirst, for the uprooting of attachment, for the cutting off of the round, for the destruction of craving, for dispassion, for cessation, for Nibbāna? Has not the Blessed One, friend, in many ways declared the abandoning of sensual pleasures, the full understanding of perceptions of sensuality, the removal of thirst for sensual pleasures, the uprooting of thoughts of sensuality, the stilling of the fevers of sensuality? This, friend, is not for the confidence of those without confidence, nor for the increase of those with confidence. Rather, friend, it is for the lack of confidence in those without confidence, and for the wavering of some who have confidence."

[39] Then those bhikkhus, having rebuked the venerable Sudinna in many ways, reported the matter to the Blessed One. Then the Blessed One, on that occasion and in that connection, had the Saṅgha of bhikkhus convened and questioned the venerable Sudinna: "Is it true, Sudinna, that you had sexual intercourse with your former wife?" — "It is true, Blessed One." The Buddha, the Blessed One, rebuked him: "It is unfitting, foolish man, unsuitable, improper, unworthy of a recluse, not allowable, not to be done. How could you, foolish man, having gone forth in such a well-proclaimed Dhamma and Discipline, not be able for life to practise the holy life complete and pure! Have I not, foolish man, in many ways taught the Dhamma for dispassion, not for passion; for detachment, not for attachment; for non-clinging, not for clinging! Yet there, foolish man, when I have taught the Dhamma for dispassion, you incline to passion; when I have taught the Dhamma for detachment, you incline to attachment; when I have taught the Dhamma for non-clinging, you incline to clinging! Have I not, foolish man, in many ways taught the Dhamma for the fading away of lust! For the subduing of intoxication, for the removal of thirst, for the uprooting of attachment, for the cutting off of the round, for the destruction of craving, for dispassion, for cessation, for Nibbāna have I taught the Dhamma! Have I not, foolish man, in many ways declared the abandoning of sensual pleasures, the full understanding of perceptions of sensuality, the removal of thirst for sensual pleasures, the uprooting of thoughts of sensuality, the stilling of the fevers of sensuality! It would be better for you, foolish man, that your male organ be put into the mouth of a poisonous viper of dreadful venom than that it be put into a woman's organ. It would be better for you, foolish man, that your male organ be put into the mouth of a black snake than that it be put into a woman's organ. It would be better for you, foolish man, that your male organ be put into a pit of charcoal, burning, blazing, glowing, than that it be put into a woman's organ. Why is that? Because on that account, foolish man, you would incur death or deadly pain, but you would not on that account, at the breaking up of the body after death, be reborn in a state of loss, a bad destination, the abyss, hell. But on this account, foolish man, at the breaking up of the body after death you would be reborn in a state of loss, a bad destination, the abyss, hell. Therein, foolish man, you have engaged in what is contrary to the true Dhamma — the way of villagers, the way of outcastes, the vile thing that ends in bathing, secret, the coupling of pairs. You, foolish man, are the first doer, the forerunner, of many unwholesome things. This, foolish man, is not for the confidence of those without confidence, nor for the increase of those with confidence; rather, foolish man, it is for the lack of confidence in those without confidence, and for the wavering of some who have confidence." Then the Blessed One, having rebuked the venerable Sudinna in many ways, having spoken in dispraise of being difficult to support, difficult to maintain, of great desires, of discontent, of association, of laziness; and having spoken in many ways in praise of being easy to support, easy to maintain, of few wishes, contented, of effacement, of scrupulousness, of what is inspiring, of decrease of defilements, of the arousing of energy; and having given the bhikkhus a talk on the Dhamma fitting and suitable to the occasion, addressed the bhikkhus: "Well then, bhikkhus, I shall lay down a training rule for the bhikkhus, founded on ten reasons: for the excellence of the Saṅgha, for the comfort of the Saṅgha, for the restraint of shameless persons, for the comfortable dwelling of well-behaved bhikkhus, for the restraint of taints belonging to the present life, for the warding off of taints belonging to future lives, for the confidence of those without confidence, for the increase of those with confidence, for the continuation of the true Dhamma, and for the support of the Discipline. And thus, bhikkhus, you should recite this training rule: 'Should any bhikkhu engage in sexual intercourse, he is defeated (pārājika), and is no longer in communion.'" Thus was this training rule laid down by the Blessed One for the bhikkhus.

[40] Now at that time a certain bhikkhu in the Great Wood at Vesālī enticed a female monkey with food and had sexual intercourse with her. Then that bhikkhu dressed in the morning, took his bowl and robe, and entered Vesālī for alms. Now at that time a number of bhikkhus wandering on a tour of the lodgings came to that bhikkhu's dwelling. That female monkey saw those bhikkhus coming while they were still far off. Having seen them, she approached those bhikkhus; having approached, she wriggled her hips in front of those bhikkhus, wagged her tail, presented her hips, and made a sign. Then it occurred to those bhikkhus: "Without doubt that bhikkhu is having sexual intercourse with this female monkey." They concealed themselves to one side. Then that bhikkhu, having walked for alms in Vesālī, took his alms-food and returned.

[41] Then that female monkey approached that bhikkhu. Then that bhikkhu ate one portion of that alms-food and gave one portion to the female monkey. Then the female monkey, having eaten that alms-food, presented her hips to that bhikkhu. Then that bhikkhu had sexual intercourse with the female monkey. Then those bhikkhus said to that bhikkhu: "Friend, has not a training rule been laid down by the Blessed One? Why do you, friend, have sexual intercourse with a female monkey?" — "It is true, friends, that a training rule has been laid down by the Blessed One; but that concerns a human woman, not an animal." — "But surely, friend, it comes to the same thing. It is unfitting, friend, unsuitable, improper, unworthy of a recluse, not allowable, not to be done. How could you, friend, having gone forth in such a well-proclaimed Dhamma and Discipline, not be able for life to practise the holy life complete and pure! Has not the Blessed One, friend, in many ways taught the Dhamma for dispassion, not for passion... the stilling of the fevers of sensuality has been declared! This, friend, is not for the confidence of those without confidence, nor for the increase of those with confidence. Rather, friend, it is for the lack of confidence in those without confidence, and for the wavering of some who have confidence." Then those bhikkhus, having rebuked that bhikkhu in many ways, reported the matter to the Blessed One.

[42] Then the Blessed One, on that occasion and in that connection, had the Saṅgha of bhikkhus convened and questioned that bhikkhu: "Is it true, bhikkhu, that you had sexual intercourse with a female monkey?" — "It is true, Blessed One." The Buddha, the Blessed One, rebuked him: "It is unfitting, foolish man, unsuitable, improper, unworthy of a recluse, not allowable, not to be done. How could you, foolish man, having gone forth in such a well-proclaimed Dhamma and Discipline, not be able for life to practise the holy life complete and pure! Have I not, foolish man, in many ways taught the Dhamma for dispassion, not for passion... the stilling of the fevers of sensuality has been declared! It would be better for you, foolish man, that your male organ be put into the mouth of a poisonous viper of dreadful venom than that it be put into a female monkey's organ. It would be better for you, foolish man, that your male organ be put into the mouth of a black snake than that it be put into a female monkey's organ. It would be better for you, foolish man, that your male organ be put into a pit of charcoal, burning, blazing, glowing, than that it be put into a female monkey's organ. Why is that? Because on that account, foolish man, you would incur death or deadly pain, but you would not on that account, at the breaking up of the body after death, be reborn in a state of loss, a bad destination, the abyss, hell. But on this account, foolish man, at the breaking up of the body after death you would be reborn in a state of loss, a bad destination, the abyss, hell. Therein, foolish man, you have engaged in what is contrary to the true Dhamma — the way of villagers, the way of outcastes, the vile thing that ends in bathing, secret, the coupling of pairs! This, foolish man, is not for the confidence of those without confidence... And thus, bhikkhus, you should recite this training rule: 'Should any bhikkhu engage in sexual intercourse, even with a female animal, he is defeated, and is no longer in communion.'" Thus was this training rule laid down by the Blessed One for the bhikkhus.

[43] Now at that time a number of Vesālian bhikkhus of the Vajji clan ate as much as they wanted, slept as much as they wanted, bathed as much as they wanted. Having eaten as much as they wanted, slept as much as they wanted, bathed as much as they wanted, attending unwisely, without renouncing the training and without declaring their weakness, they engaged in sexual intercourse. Later on, afflicted by misfortune among relatives, afflicted by loss of wealth, afflicted by sickness, they approached the venerable Ānanda and said: "Venerable Ānanda, we are not finding fault with the Buddha, nor with the Dhamma, nor with the Saṅgha; we find fault with ourselves, venerable Ānanda, not with another. We are the unlucky ones, we are the ones of little merit, in that we, having gone forth in such a well-proclaimed Dhamma and Discipline, were not able for life to practise the holy life complete and pure. If even now, venerable Ānanda, we might obtain the going forth in the presence of the Blessed One and obtain the higher ordination, then even now we would dwell as those with insight into wholesome states, devoted in the first and last watches of the night to the development of the states pertaining to enlightenment. It would be good, venerable Ānanda, if you would report this matter to the Blessed One." — "Yes, friends," the venerable Ānanda replied to the Vesālian bhikkhus of the Vajji clan, and he approached the Blessed One; having approached, he reported the matter to the Blessed One. "It is impossible, Ānanda, it cannot happen, that a Tathāgata should abolish for the sake of the Vajjis or the Vajji-clansmen a pārājika training rule that has been laid down for his disciples." Then the Blessed One, on that occasion and in that connection, having given a talk on the Dhamma, addressed the bhikkhus: "Bhikkhus, whoever engages in sexual intercourse without having renounced the training and without having declared his weakness, if he comes back he is not to be given the higher ordination. But whoever, bhikkhus, engages in sexual intercourse having renounced the training and having declared his weakness, if he comes back he may be given the higher ordination. And thus, bhikkhus, you should recite this training rule —

----------------------------------------
Original (Pali, IAST):

[24] Tena kho pana samayena vesāliyā avidūre kalandagāmo nāma atthi . Tattha sudinno nāma kalandaputto seṭṭhiputto hoti. Atha kho sudinno kalandaputto sambahulehi sahāyakehi saddhiṃ vesāliṃ agamāsi kenacideva karaṇīyena. Tena kho pana samayena bhagavā mahatiyā parisāya parivuto dhammaṃ desento nisinno hoti. Addasa kho sudinno kalandaputto bhagavantaṃ mahatiyā parisāya parivutaṃ dhammaṃ desentaṃ nisinnaṃ. Disvānassa etadahosi – ‘‘yaṃnūnāhampi dhammaṃ suṇeyya’’nti. Atha kho sudinno kalandaputto yena sā parisā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinnassa kho sudinnassa kalandaputtassa etadahosi – ‘‘yathā yathā kho ahaṃ bhagavatā dhammaṃ desitaṃ ājānāmi, nayidaṃ sukaraṃ agāraṃ ajjhāvasatā ekantaparipuṇṇaṃ ekantaparisuddhaṃ saṅkhalikhitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ carituṃ; yaṃnūnāhaṃ kesamassuṃ ohāretvā kāsāyāni vatthāni acchādetvā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajeyya’’nti. Atha kho sā parisā bhagavatā dhammiyā kathāya sandassitā samādapitā samuttejitā sampahaṃsitā uṭṭhāyāsanā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā padakkhiṇaṃ katvā pakkāmi.

[25] Atha kho sudinno kalandaputto aciravuṭṭhitāya parisāya yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisinno kho sudinno kalandaputto bhagavantaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘yathā yathāhaṃ, bhante, bhagavatā dhammaṃ desitaṃ ājānāmi, nayidaṃ sukaraṃ agāraṃ ajjhāvasatā ekantaparipuṇṇaṃ ekantaparisuddhaṃ saṅkhalikhitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ carituṃ; icchāmahaṃ, bhante, kesamassuṃ ohāretvā kāsāyāni vatthāni acchādetvā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajituṃ. Pabbājetu maṃ bhagavā’’ti. ‘‘Anuññātosi pana tvaṃ, suddinna, mātāpitūhi agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajjāyā’’ti? ‘‘Na kho ahaṃ, bhante, anuññāto mātāpitūhi agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajjāyā’’ti. ‘‘Na kho, sudinna, tathāgatā ananuññātaṃ mātāpitūhi puttaṃ pabbājentī’’ti. ‘‘Sohaṃ, bhante, tathā karissāmi yathā maṃ mātāpitaro anujānissanti agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajjāyā’’ti.

[26] Atha kho sudinno kalandaputto vesāliyaṃ taṃ karaṇīyaṃ tīretvā yena kalandagāmo yena mātāpitaro tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā mātāpitaro etadavoca – ‘‘ammatātā, yathā yathāhaṃ bhagavatā dhammaṃ desitaṃ ājānāmi, nayidaṃ sukaraṃ agāraṃ ajjhāvasatā ekantaparipuṇṇaṃ ekantaparisuddhaṃ saṅkhalikhitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ carituṃ; icchāmahaṃ kesamassuṃ ohāretvā kāsāyāni vatthāni acchādetvā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajituṃ. Anujānātha maṃ agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajjāyā’’ti. Evaṃ vutte sudinnassa kalandaputtassa mātāpitaro sudinnaṃ kalandaputtaṃ etadavocuṃ – ‘‘tvaṃ khosi, tāta sudinna, amhākaṃ ekaputtako piyo manāpo sukhedhito sukhaparihato. Na tvaṃ, tāta sudinna, kiñci dukkhassa jānāsi. Maraṇenapi mayaṃ te akāmakā vinā bhavissāma, kiṃ pana mayaṃ taṃ jīvantaṃ anujānissāma agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajjāyā’’ti. Dutiyampi kho sudinno kalandaputto mātāpitaro etadavoca – ‘‘ammatātā, yathā yathāhaṃ bhagavatā dhammaṃ desitaṃ ājānāmi, nayidaṃ sukaraṃ agāraṃ ajjhāvasatā ekantaparipuṇṇaṃ ekantaparisuddhaṃ saṅkhalikhitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ carituṃ; icchāmahaṃ kesamassuṃ ohāretvā kāsāyāni vatthāni acchādetvā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajituṃ. Anujānātha maṃ agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajjāyā’’ti. Dutiyampi kho sudinnassa kalandaputtassa mātāpitaro sudinnaṃ kalandaputtaṃ etadavocuṃ – ‘‘tvaṃ khosi, tāta sudinna, amhākaṃ ekaputtako piyo manāpo sukhedhito sukhaparihato. Na tvaṃ, tāta sudinna, kiñci dukkhassa jānāsi. Maraṇenapi mayaṃ te akāmakā vinā bhavissāma, kiṃ pana mayaṃ taṃ jīvantaṃ anujānissāma agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajjāyā’’ti! Tatiyampi kho sudinno kalandaputto mātāpitaro etadavoca – ‘‘ammatātā, yathā yathāhaṃ bhagavatā dhammaṃ desitaṃ ājānāmi, nayidaṃ sukaraṃ agāraṃ ajjhāvasatā ekantaparipuṇṇaṃ ekantaparisuddhaṃ saṅkhalikhitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ carituṃ; icchāmahaṃ kesamassuṃ ohāretvā kāsāyāni vatthāni acchādetvā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajituṃ. Anujānātha maṃ agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajjāyā’’ti. Tatiyampi kho sudinnassa kalandaputtassa mātāpitaro sudinnaṃ kalandaputtaṃ etadavocuṃ – ‘‘tvaṃ khosi, tāta sudinna, amhākaṃ ekaputtako piyo manāpo sukhedhito sukhaparihato. Na tvaṃ, tāta sudinna, kiñci dukkhassa jānāsi. Maraṇenapi mayaṃ te akāmakā vinā bhavissāma, kiṃ pana mayaṃ taṃ jīvantaṃ anujānissāma agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajjāyā’’ti!

[27] Atha kho sudinno kalandaputto – ‘‘na maṃ mātāpitaro anujānanti agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajjāyā’’ti, tattheva anantarahitāya bhūmiyā nipajji – idheva me maraṇaṃ bhavissati pabbajjā vāti. Atha kho sudinno kalandaputto ekampi bhattaṃ na bhuñji, dvepi bhattāni na bhuñji, tīṇipi bhattāni na bhuñji, cattāripi bhattāni na bhuñji, pañcapi bhattāni na bhuñji, chapi bhattāni na bhuñji, sattapi bhattāni na bhuñji.

[28] Atha kho sudinnassa kalandaputtassa mātāpitaro sudinnaṃ kalandaputtaṃ etadavocuṃ – ‘‘tvaṃ khosi, tāta sudinna, amhākaṃ ekaputtako piyo manāpo sukhedhito sukhaparihato. Na tvaṃ, tāta sudinna, kiñci dukkhassa jānāsi. Maraṇenapi mayaṃ te akāmakā vinā bhavissāma, kiṃ pana mayaṃ taṃ jīvantaṃ anujānissāma agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajjāya? Uṭṭhehi, tāta sudinna, bhuñja ca piva ca paricārehi ca, bhuñjanto pivanto paricārento kāme paribhuñjanto puññāni karonto abhiramassu. Na taṃ mayaṃ anujānāma agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajjāyā’’ti. Evaṃ vutte sudinno kalandaputto tuṇhī ahosi. Dutiyampi kho…pe… tatiyampi kho sudinnassa kalandaputtassa mātāpitaro sudinnaṃ kalandaputtaṃ etadavocuṃ – ‘‘tvaṃ khosi, tāta sudinna, amhākaṃ ekaputtako piyo manāpo sukhedhito sukhaparihato. Na tvaṃ, tāta sudinna, kiñci dukkhassa jānāsi. Maraṇenapi mayaṃ te akāmakā vinā bhavissāma, kiṃ pana mayaṃ taṃ jīvantaṃ anujānissāma agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajjāya! Uṭṭhehi, tāta sudinna, bhuñja ca piva ca paricārehi ca, bhuñjanto pivanto paricārento kāme paribhuñjanto puññāni karonto abhiramassu. Na taṃ mayaṃ anujānāma agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajjāyā’’ti. Tatiyampi kho sudinno kalandaputto tuṇhī ahosi. Atha kho sudinnassa kalandaputtassa sahāyakā yena sudinno kalandaputto tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā sudinnaṃ kalandaputtaṃ etadavocuṃ – ‘‘tvaṃ khosi, samma sudinna, mātāpitūnaṃ ekaputtako piyo manāpo sukhedhito sukhaparihato. Na tvaṃ, samma sudinna, kiñci dukkhassa jānāsi. Maraṇenapi te mātāpitaro akāmakā vinā bhavissanti, kiṃ pana taṃ jīvantaṃ anujānissanti agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajāya! Uṭṭhehi, samma sudinna, bhuñja ca piva ca paricārehi ca, bhuñjanto pivanto paricārento kāme paribhuñjanto puññāni karonto abhiramassu, na taṃ mātāpitaro anujānissanti agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajjāyā’’ti. Evaṃ vutte, sudinno kalandaputto tuṇhī ahosi. Dutiyampi kho…pe… tatiyampi kho sudinnassa kalandaputtassa sahāyakā sudinnaṃ kalandaputtaṃ etadavocuṃ – ‘‘tvaṃ khosi, samma sudinna…pe… tatiyampi kho sudinno kalandaputto tuṇhī ahosi.

[29] Atha kho sudinnassa kalandaputtassa sahāyakā yena sudinnassa kalandaputtassa mātāpitaro tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā sudinnassa kalandaputtassa mātāpitaro etadavocuṃ – ‘‘ammatātā, eso sudinno anantarahitāya bhūmiyā nipanno – ‘idheva me maraṇaṃ bhavissati pabbajjā vā’ti. Sace tumhe sudinnaṃ nānujānissatha agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajjāya, tattheva maraṇaṃ āgamissati. Sace pana tumhe sudinnaṃ anujānissatha agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajjāya, pabbajitampi naṃ dakkhissatha. Sace sudinno nābhiramissati agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajjāya, kā tassa aññā gati bhavissati, idheva paccāgamissati. Anujānātha sudinnaṃ agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajjāyā’’ti. ‘‘Anujānāma, tātā, sudinnaṃ agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajjāyā’’ti. Atha kho sudinnassa kalandaputtassa sahāyakā yena sudinno kalandaputto tenupasaṅkamiṃsu; upasaṅkamitvā sudinnaṃ kalandaputtaṃ etadavocuṃ – ‘‘uṭṭhehi, samma sudinna, anuññātosi mātāpitūhi agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajjāyā’’ti.

[30] Atha kho sudinno kalandaputto – ‘‘anuññātomhi kira mātāpitūhi agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajjāyā’’ti, haṭṭho udaggo pāṇinā gattāni paripuñchanto vuṭṭhāsi. Atha kho sudinno kalandaputto katipāhaṃ balaṃ gāhetvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavantaṃ abhivādetvā ekamantaṃ nisīdi. Ekamantaṃ nisanno kho sudinno kalandaputto bhagavantaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘anuññāto ahaṃ, bhante, mātāpitūhi agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajjāya. Pabbājetu maṃ bhagavā’’ti. Alattha kho sudinno kalandaputto bhagavato santike pabbajjaṃ, alattha upasampadaṃ. Acirūpasampanno ca panāyasmā sudinno evarūpe dhutaguṇe samādāya vattati, āraññiko hoti piṇḍapātiko paṃsukūliko sapadānacāriko, aññataraṃ vajjigāmaṃ upanissāya viharati. Tena kho pana samayena vajjī dubbhikkhā hoti dvīhitikā setaṭṭhikā salākāvuttā, na sukarā uñchena paggahena yāpetuṃ. Atha kho āyasmato sudinnassa etadahosi – ‘‘etarahi kho vajjī dubbhikkhā dvīhitikā setaṭṭhikā salākāvuttā, na sukarā uñchena paggahena yāpetuṃ. Bahū kho pana me vesāliyaṃ ñātī aḍḍhā mahaddhanā mahābhogā pahūtajātarūparajatā pahūtavittūpakaraṇā pahūtadhanadhaññā. Yaṃnūnāhaṃ ñātī upanissāya vihareyyaṃ! Ñātī maṃ nissāya dānāni dassanti puññāni karissanti, bhikkhū ca lābhaṃ lacchanti, ahañca piṇḍakena na kilamissāmī’’ti. Atha kho āyasmā sudinno senāsanaṃ saṃsāmetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena vesālī tena pakkāmi. Anupubbena yena vesālī tadavasari. Tatra sudaṃ āyasmā sudinno vesāliyaṃ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṃ. Assosuṃ kho āyasmato sudinnassa ñātakā – ‘‘sudinno kira kalandaputto vesāliṃ anuppatto’’ti. Te āyasmato sudinnassa saṭṭhimatte thālipāke bhattābhihāraṃ abhihariṃsu. Atha kho āyasmā sudinno te saṭṭhimatte thālipāke bhikkhūnaṃ vissajjetvā pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya kalandagāmaṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi. Kalandagāme sapadānaṃ piṇḍāya caramāno yena sakapitu nivesanaṃ tenupasaṅkami.

[31] Tena kho pana samayena āyasmato sudinnassa ñātidāsī ābhidosikaṃ kummāsaṃ chaḍḍetukāmā hoti. Atha kho āyasmā sudinno taṃ ñātidāsiṃ etadavoca – ‘‘sace taṃ, bhagini, chaḍḍanīyadhammaṃ, idha me patte ākirā’’ti. Atha kho āyasmato sudinnassa ñātidāsī taṃ ābhidosikaṃ kummāsaṃ āyasmato sudinnassa patte ākirantī hatthānañca pādānañca sarassa ca nimittaṃ aggahesi. Atha kho āyasmato sudinnassa ñātidāsī yenāyasmato sudinnassa mātā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmato sudinnassa mātaraṃ etadavoca – ‘‘yaggheyye, jāneyyāsi, ayyaputto sudinno anuppatto’’ti. ‘‘Sace, je, tvaṃ saccaṃ bhaṇasi, adāsiṃ taṃ karomī’’ti.

[32] Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā sudinno taṃ ābhidosikaṃ kummāsaṃ aññataraṃ kuṭṭamūlaṃ nissāya paribhuñjati. Pitāpi kho āyasmato sudinnassa kammantā āgacchanto addasa āyasmantaṃ sudinnaṃ taṃ ābhidosikaṃ kummāsaṃ aññataraṃ kuṭṭamūlaṃ nissāya paribhuñjantaṃ. Disvāna yenāyasmā sudinno tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ sudinnaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘atthi nāma, tāta sudinna, ābhidosikaṃ kummāsaṃ paribhuñjissasi! Nanu nāma, tāta sudinna, sakaṃ gehaṃ gantabba’’nti? ‘‘Agamimha kho te gahapati, gehaṃ. Tatoyaṃ ābhidosiko kummāso’’ti. Atha kho āyasmato sudinnassa pitā āyasmato sudinnassa bāhāyaṃ gahetvā āyasmantaṃ sudinnaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘ehi, tāta sudinna, gharaṃ gamissāmā’’ti. Atha kho āyasmā sudinno yena sakapitu nivesanaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi. Atha kho āyasmato sudinnassa pitā āyasmantaṃ sudinnaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘bhuñja, tāta sudinnā’’ti. ‘‘Alaṃ, gahapati, kataṃ me ajja bhattakicca’’nti. ‘‘Adhivāsehi, tāta sudinna, svātanāya bhatta’’nti. Adhivāsesi kho āyasmā sudinno tuṇhībhāvena. Atha kho āyasmā sudinno uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkāmi.

[33] Atha kho āyasmato sudinnassa mātā tassā rattiyā accayena haritena gomayena pathaviṃ opuñjāpetvā dve puñje kārāpesi – ekaṃ hiraññassa, ekaṃ suvaṇṇassa. Tāva mahantā puñjā ahesuṃ, orato ṭhito puriso pārato ṭhitaṃ purisaṃ na passati; pārato ṭhito puriso orato ṭhitaṃ purisaṃ na passati. Te puñje kilañjehi paṭicchādāpetvā majjhe āsanaṃ paññāpetvā tirokaraṇīyaṃ parikkhipitvā āyasmato sudinnassa purāṇadutiyikaṃ āmantesi – ‘‘tena hi, vadhu, yena alaṅkārena alaṅkatā puttassa me sudinnassa piyā ahosi manāpā tena alaṅkārena alaṅkarā’’ti. ‘‘Evaṃ, ayye’’ti, kho āyasmato sudinnassa purāṇadutiyikā āyasmato sudinnassa mātuyā paccassosi.

[34] Atha kho āyasmā sudinno pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya yena sakapitu nivesanaṃ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi. Atha kho āyasmato sudinnassa pitā yenāyasmā sudinno tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā te puñje vivarāpetvā āyasmantaṃ sudinnaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘idaṃ te, tāta sudinna, mātu mattikaṃ itthikāya itthidhanaṃ, aññaṃ pettikaṃ aññaṃ pitāmahaṃ. Labbhā, tāta sudinna, hīnāyāvattitvā bhogā ca bhuñjituṃ puññāni ca kātuṃ. Ehi tvaṃ, tāta sudinna, hīnāyāvattitvā bhoge ca bhuñjassu puññāni ca karohī’’ti. ‘‘Tāta, na ussahāmi na visahāmi, abhirato ahaṃ brahmacariyaṃ carāmī’’ti. Dutiyampi kho…pe… tatiyampi kho āyasmato sudinnassa pitā āyasmantaṃ sudinnaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘idaṃ te, tāta sudinna, mātu mattikaṃ, itthikāya itthidhanaṃ, aññaṃ pettikaṃ, aññaṃ pitāmahaṃ. Labbhā, tāta sudinna, hīnāyāvattitvā bhogā ca bhuñjituṃ puññāni ca kātuṃ. Ehi tvaṃ, tāta sudinna, hīnāyāvattitvā bhoge ca bhuñjassu puññāni ca karohī’’ti. ‘‘Vadeyyāma kho taṃ, gahapati, sace tvaṃ nātikaḍḍheyyāsī’’ti. ‘‘Vadehi, tāta sudinnā’’ti. Tena hi tvaṃ, gahapati, mahante mahante sāṇipasibbake kārāpetvā hiraññasuvaṇṇassa pūrāpetvā sakaṭehi nibbāhāpetvā majjhe gaṅgāya sote opātehi . Taṃ kissa hetu? Yañhi te, gahapati, bhavissati tatonidānaṃ bhayaṃ vā chambhitattaṃ vā lomahaṃso vā ārakkho vā so te na bhavissatī’’ti. Evaṃ vutte, āyasmato sudinnassa pitā anattamano ahosi – ‘‘kathañhi nāma putto sudinno evaṃ vakkhatī’’ti!

[35] Atha kho āyasmato sudinnassa pitā āyasmato sudinnassa purāṇadutiyikaṃ āmantesi – ‘‘tena hi, vadhu, tvaṃ piyā ca manāpā ca . Appeva nāma putto sudinno tuyhampi vacanaṃ kareyyā’’ti! Atha kho āyasmato sudinnassa purāṇadutiyikā āyasmato sudinnassa pādesu gahetvā āyasmantaṃ sudinnaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘kīdisā nāma tā, ayyaputta, accharāyo yāsaṃ tvaṃ hetu brahmacariyaṃ carasī’’ti? ‘‘Na kho ahaṃ, bhagini, accharānaṃ hetu brahmacariyaṃ carāmī’’ti. Atha kho āyasmato sudinnassa purāṇadutiyikā – ‘‘ajjatagge maṃ ayyaputto sudinno bhaginivādena samudācaratī’’ti, tattheva mucchitā papatā. Atha kho āyasmā sudinno pitaraṃ etadavoca – ‘‘sace, gahapati, bhojanaṃ dātabbaṃ detha, mā no viheṭhayitthā’’ti. ‘‘Bhuñja, tāta sudinnā’’ti. Atha kho āyasmato sudinnassa mātā ca pitā ca āyasmantaṃ sudinnaṃ paṇītena khādanīyena bhojanīyena sahatthā santappesuṃ sampavāresuṃ. Atha kho āyasmato sudinnassa mātā āyasmantaṃ sudinnaṃ bhuttāviṃ onītapattapāṇiṃ etadavoca – ‘‘idaṃ, tāta sudinna, kulaṃ aḍḍhaṃ mahaddhanaṃ mahābhogaṃ pahūtajātarūparajataṃ pahūtavittūpakaraṇaṃ pahūtadhanadhaññaṃ. Labbhā, tāta sudinna, hīnāyāvattitvā bhogā ca bhuñjituṃ puññāni ca kātuṃ. Ehi tvaṃ, tāta sudinna, hīnāyāvattitvā bhoge ca bhuñjassu puññāni ca karohī’’ti. ‘‘Amma, na ussahāmi na visahāmi, abhirato ahaṃ brahmacariyaṃ carāmī’’ti. Dutiyampi kho…pe… tatiyampi kho āyasmato sudinnassa mātā āyasmantaṃ sudinnaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘idaṃ, tāta sudinna, kulaṃ aḍḍhaṃ mahaddhanaṃ mahābhogaṃ pahūtajātarūparajataṃ pahūtavittūpakaraṇaṃ pahūtadhanadhaññaṃ . Tena hi, tāta sudinna, bījakampi dehi – mā no aputtakaṃ sāpateyyaṃ licchavayo atiharāpesu’’nti. ‘‘Etaṃ kho me, amma, sakkā kātu’’nti. ‘‘Kahaṃ pana, tāta sudinna, etarahi viharasī’’ti? ‘‘Mahāvane, ammā’’ti. Atha kho āyasmā sudinno uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkāmi.

[36] Atha kho āyasmato sudinnassa mātā āyasmato sudinnassa purāṇadutiyikaṃ āmantesi – ‘‘tena hi, vadhu, yadā utunī hosi, pupphaṃ te uppannaṃ hoti, atha me āroceyyāsī’’ti. ‘‘Evaṃ ayye’’ti kho āyasmato sudinnassa purāṇadutiyikā āyasmato sudinnassa mātuyā paccassosi. Atha kho āyasmato sudinnassa purāṇadutiyikā nacirasseva utunī ahosi, pupphaṃsā uppajji. Atha kho āyasmato sudinnassa purāṇadutiyikā āyasmato sudinnassa mātaraṃ etadavoca – ‘‘utunīmhi, ayye, pupphaṃ me uppanna’’nti. ‘‘Tena hi, vadhu, yena alaṅkārena alaṅkatā puttassa sudinnassa piyā ahosi manāpā tena alaṅkārena alaṅkarā’’ti. ‘‘Evaṃ ayye’’ti kho āyasmato sudinnassa purāṇadutiyikā āyasmato sudinnassa mātuyā paccassosi. Atha kho āyasmato sudinnassa mātā āyasmato sudinnassa purāṇadutiyikaṃ ādāya yena mahāvanaṃ yenāyasmā sudinno tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṃ sudinnaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘idaṃ, tāta sudinna, kulaṃ aḍḍhaṃ mahaddhanaṃ mahābhogaṃ pahūtajātarūparajataṃ pahūtavittūpakaraṇaṃ pahūtadhanadhaññaṃ. Labbhā, tāta sudinna, hīnāyāvattitvā bhogā ca bhuñjituṃ puññāni ca kātuṃ. Ehi tvaṃ, tāta sudinna, hīnāyāvattitvā bhoge ca bhuñjassu puññāni ca karohī’’ti. ‘‘Amma, na ussahāmi na visahāmi, abhirato ahaṃ brahmacariyaṃ carāmī’’ti. Dutiyampi kho…pe… tatiyampi kho āyasmato sudinnassa mātā āyasmantaṃ sudinnaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘idaṃ, tāta sudinna, kulaṃ aḍḍhaṃ mahaddhanaṃ mahābhogaṃ pahūtajātarūparajataṃ pahūtavittūpakaraṇaṃ pahūtadhanadhaññaṃ. Tena hi, tāta sudinna, bījakampi dehi – mā no aputtakaṃ sāpateyyaṃ licchavayo atiharāpesu’’nti. ‘‘Etaṃ kho me, amma, sakkā kātu’’nti, purāṇadutiyikāya bāhāyaṃ gahetvā mahāvanaṃ ajjhogāhetvā apaññatte sikkhāpade anādīnavadasso purāṇadutiyikāya tikkhattuṃ methunaṃ dhammaṃ abhiviññāpesi. Sā tena gabbhaṃ gaṇhi. Bhummā devā saddamanussāvesuṃ – ‘‘nirabbudo vata, bho, bhikkhusaṅgho nirādīnavo; sudinnena kalandaputtena abbudaṃ uppāditaṃ, ādīnavo uppādito’’ti. Bhummānaṃ devānaṃ saddaṃ sutvā cātumahārājikā devā saddamanussāvesuṃ…pe… tāvatiṃsā devā… yāmā devā … tusitā devā… nimmānaratī devā… paranimmitavasavattī devā… brahmakāyikā devā saddamanussāvesuṃ – ‘‘nirabbudo vata, bho, bhikkhusaṅgho nirādīnavo; sudinnena kalandaputtena abbudaṃ uppāditaṃ, ādīnavo uppādito’’ti. Itiha tena khaṇena tena muhuttena yāva brahmalokā saddo abbhuggacchi. Atha kho āyasmato sudinnassa purāṇadutiyikā tassa gabbhassa paripākamanvāya puttaṃ vijāyi. Atha kho āyasmato sudinnassa sahāyakā tassa dārakassa ‘bījako’ti nāmaṃ akaṃsu. Āyasmato sudinnassa purāṇadutiyikāya bījakamātāti nāmaṃ akaṃsu. Āyasmato sudinnassa bījakapitāti nāmaṃ akaṃsu. Te aparena samayena ubho agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitvā arahattaṃ sacchākaṃsu.

[37] Atha kho āyasmato sudinnassa ahudeva kukkuccaṃ, ahu vippaṭisāro – ‘‘alābhā vata me, na vata me lābhā! Dulladdhaṃ vata me, na vata me suladdhaṃ! Yohaṃ evaṃ svākkhāte dhammavinaye pabbajitvā nāsakkhiṃ yāvajīvaṃ paripuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ caritu’’nti. So teneva kukkuccena tena vippaṭisārena kiso ahosi lūkho dubbaṇṇo uppaṇḍuppaṇḍukajāto dhamanisanthatagatto antomano līnamano dukkhī dummano vippaṭisārī pajjhāyi.

[38] Atha kho āyasmato sudinnassa sahāyakā bhikkhū āyasmantaṃ sudinnaṃ etadavocuṃ – ‘‘pubbe kho tvaṃ, āvuso sudinna, vaṇṇavā ahosi pīṇindriyo pasannamukhavaṇṇo vippasannachavivaṇṇo; so dāni tvaṃ etarahi kiso lūkho dubbaṇṇo uppaṇḍuppaṇḍukajāto dhamanisanthatagatto antomano līnamano dukkhī dummano vippaṭisārī pajjhāyasi. Kacci no tvaṃ, āvuso sudinna, anabhirato brahmacariyaṃ carasī’’ti? ‘‘Na kho ahaṃ, āvuso, anabhirato brahmacariyaṃ carāmi. Atthi me pāpakammaṃ kataṃ; purāṇadutiyikāya methuno dhammo paṭisevito; tassa mayhaṃ, āvuso, ahudeva kukkuccaṃ ahu vippaṭisāro – ‘alābhā vata me, na vata me lābhā; dulladdhaṃ vata me, na vata me suladdhaṃ; yohaṃ evaṃ svākkhāte dhammavinaye pabbajitvā nāsakkhiṃ yāvajīvaṃ paripuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ caritu’’nti. ‘‘Alañhi te, āvuso sudinna, kukkuccāya alaṃ vippaṭisārāya yaṃ tvaṃ evaṃ svākkhāte dhammavinaye pabbajitvā na sakkhissasi yāvajīvaṃ paripuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ carituṃ. Nanu, āvuso, bhagavatā anekapariyāyena virāgāya dhammo desito, no sarāgāya; visaṃyogāya dhammo desito, no saṃyogāya; anupādānāya dhammo desito, no saupādānāya. Tattha nāma tvaṃ, āvuso, bhagavatā virāgāya dhamme desite sarāgāya cetessasi, visaṃyogāya dhamme desite saṃyogāya cetessasi, anupādānāya dhamme desite saupādānāya cetessasi! Nanu, āvuso, bhagavatā anekapariyāyena rāgavirāgāya dhammo desito, madanimmadanāya pipāsavinayāya ālayasamugghātāya vaṭṭupacchedāya taṇhākkhayāya virāgāya nirodhāya nibbānāya dhammo desito! Nanu, āvuso, bhagavatā anekapariyāyena kāmānaṃ pahānaṃ akkhātaṃ, kāmasaññānaṃ pariññā akkhātā, kāmapipāsānaṃ paṭivinayo akkhāto, kāmavitakkānaṃ samugghāto akkhāto, kāmapariḷāhānaṃ vūpasamo akkhāto! Netaṃ, āvuso, appasannānaṃ vā pasādāya, pasannānaṃ vā bhiyyobhāvāya. Atha khvetaṃ, āvuso, appasannānañceva appasādāya pasannānañca ekaccānaṃ aññathattāyā’’ti.

[39] Atha kho te bhikkhū āyasmantaṃ sudinnaṃ anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocesuṃ. Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṃ nidāne etasmiṃ pakaraṇe bhikkhusaṅghaṃ sannipātāpetvā āyasmantaṃ sudinnaṃ paṭipucchi – ‘‘saccaṃ kira tvaṃ, sudinna, purāṇadutiyikāya methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevī’’ti? ‘‘Saccaṃ, bhagavā’’ti. Vigarahi buddho bhagavā – ‘‘ananucchavikaṃ , moghapurisa, ananulomikaṃ appaṭirūpaṃ assāmaṇakaṃ akappiyaṃ akaraṇīyaṃ. Kathañhi nāma tvaṃ, moghapurisa, evaṃ svākkhāte dhammavinaye pabbajitvā na sakkhissasi yāvajīvaṃ paripuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ carituṃ! Nanu mayā, moghapurisa, anekapariyāyena virāgāya dhammo desito, no sarāgāya; visaṃyogāya dhammo desito, no saṃyogāya; anupādānāya dhammo desito, no saupādānāya! Tattha nāma tvaṃ, moghapurisa, mayā virāgāya dhamme desite sarāgāya cetessasi, visaṃyogāya dhamme desite saṃyogāya cetessasi, anupādānāya dhamme desite saupādānāya cetessasi! Nanu mayā, moghapurisa, anekapariyāyena rāgavirāgāya dhammo desito! Madanimmadanāya pipāsavinayāya ālayasamugghātāya vaṭṭupacchedāya taṇhākkhayāya virāgāya nirodhāya nibbānāya dhammo desito! Nanu mayā, moghapurisa, anekapariyāyena kāmānaṃ pahānaṃ akkhātaṃ, kāmasaññānaṃ pariññā akkhātā, kāmapipāsānaṃ paṭivinayo akkhāto, kāmavitakkānaṃ samugghāto akkhāto, kāmapariḷāhānaṃ vūpasamo akkhāto! Varaṃ te, moghapurisa, āsivisassa ghoravisassa mukhe aṅgajātaṃ pakkhittaṃ, na tveva mātugāmassa aṅgajāte aṅgajātaṃ pakkhittaṃ. Varaṃ te, moghapurisa, kaṇhasappassa mukhe aṅgajātaṃ pakkhittaṃ, na tveva mātugāmassa aṅgajāte aṅgajātaṃ pakkhittaṃ. Varaṃ te, moghapurisa, aṅgārakāsuyā ādittāya sampajjalitāya sajotibhūtāya aṅgajātaṃ pakkhittaṃ, na tveva mātugāmassa aṅgajāte aṅgajātaṃ pakkhittaṃ. Taṃ kissa hetu? Tatonidānañhi, moghapurisa, maraṇaṃ vā nigaccheyya maraṇamattaṃ vā dukkhaṃ, na tveva tappaccayā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjeyya. Itonidānañca kho, moghapurisa, kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjeyya. Tattha nāma tvaṃ, moghapurisa, yaṃ tvaṃ asaddhammaṃ gāmadhammaṃ vasaladhammaṃ duṭṭhullaṃ odakantikaṃ rahassaṃ dvayaṃdvayasamāpattiṃ samāpajjissasi, bahūnaṃ kho tvaṃ, moghapurisa, akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ ādikattā pubbaṅgamo. Netaṃ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṃ vā pasādāya, pasannānaṃ vā bhiyyobhāvāya; atha khvetaṃ, moghapurisa, appasannānañceva appasādāya, pasannānañca ekaccānaṃ aññathattāyā’’ti. Atha kho bhagavā āyasmantaṃ sudinnaṃ anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā dubbharatāya dupposatāya mahicchatāya asantuṭṭhitāya saṅgaṇikāya kosajjassa avaṇṇaṃ bhāsitvā anekapariyāyena subharatāya suposatāya appicchassa santuṭṭhassa sallekhassa dhutassa pāsādikassa apacayassa vīriyārambhassa vaṇṇaṃ bhāsitvā bhikkhūnaṃ tadanucchavikaṃ tadanulomikaṃ dhammiṃ kathaṃ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi – ‘‘tena hi, bhikkhave, bhikkhūnaṃ sikkhāpadaṃ paññapessāmi dasa atthavase paṭicca – saṅghasuṭṭhutāya, saṅghaphāsutāya, dummaṅkūnaṃ puggalānaṃ niggahāya, pesalānaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ phāsuvihārāya, diṭṭhadhammikānaṃ āsavānaṃ saṃvarāya, samparāyikānaṃ āsavānaṃ paṭighātāya, appasannānaṃ pasādāya, pasannānaṃ bhiyyobhāvāya, saddhammaṭṭhitiyā, vinayānuggahāya. Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṃ sikkhāpadaṃ uddiseyyātha – ‘‘Yo pana bhikkhu methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭiseveyya, pārājiko hoti asaṃvāso’’ti. Evañcidaṃ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṃ sikkhāpadaṃ paññattaṃ hoti.

[40] Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu vesāliyaṃ mahāvane makkaṭiṃ āmisena upalāpetvā tassā methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevati. Atha kho so bhikkhu pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaraṃ ādāya vesāliṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi. Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā bhikkhū senāsanacārikaṃ āhiṇḍantā yena tassa bhikkhuno vihāro tenupasaṅkamiṃsu. Addasa kho sā makkaṭī te bhikkhū dūratova āgacchante. Disvāna yena te bhikkhū tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā tesaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ purato kaṭimpi cālesi cheppampi cālesi, kaṭimpi oḍḍi, nimittampi akāsi. Atha kho tesaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ etadahosi – ‘‘nissaṃsayaṃ kho so bhikkhu imissā makkaṭiyā methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevatī’’ti. Ekamantaṃ nilīyiṃsu. Atha kho so bhikkhu vesāliyaṃ piṇḍāya caritvā piṇḍapātaṃ ādāya paṭikkami.

[41] Atha kho sā makkaṭī yena so bhikkhu tenupasaṅkami. Atha kho so bhikkhu taṃ piṇḍapātaṃ ekadesaṃ bhuñjitvā ekadesaṃ tassā makkaṭiyā adāsi. Atha kho sā makkaṭī taṃ piṇḍapātaṃ bhuñjitvā tassa bhikkhuno kaṭiṃ oḍḍi. Atha kho so bhikkhu tassā makkaṭiyā methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevati. Atha kho te bhikkhū taṃ bhikkhuṃ etadavocuṃ – ‘‘nanu, āvuso, bhagavatā sikkhāpadaṃ paññattaṃ; kissa tvaṃ, āvuso, makkaṭiyā methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevasī’’ti? ‘‘Saccaṃ, āvuso, bhagavatā sikkhāpadaṃ paññattaṃ; tañca kho manussitthiyā, no tiracchānagatāyā’’ti. ‘‘Nanu, āvuso, tatheva taṃ hoti. Ananucchavikaṃ, āvuso, ananulomikaṃ appaṭirūpaṃ assāmaṇakaṃ akappiyaṃ akaraṇīyaṃ. Kathañhi nāma tvaṃ, āvuso, evaṃ svākkhāte dhammavinaye pabbajitvā na sakkhissasi yāvajīvaṃ paripuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ carituṃ! Nanu, āvuso, bhagavatā anekapariyāyena virāgāya dhammo desito, no sarāgāya…pe… kāmapariḷāhānaṃ vūpasamo akkhāto! Netaṃ, āvuso, appasannānaṃ vā pasādāya pasannānaṃ vā bhiyyobhāvāya. Atha khvetaṃ, āvuso, appasannānañceva appasādāya, pasannānañca ekaccānaṃ aññathattāyā’’ti. Atha kho te bhikkhū taṃ bhikkhuṃ anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṃ arocesuṃ.

[42] Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṃ nidāne etasmiṃ pakaraṇe bhikkhusaṅghaṃ sannipātāpetvā taṃ bhikkhuṃ paṭipucchi – ‘‘saccaṃ kira tvaṃ, bhikkhu, makkaṭiyā methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevī’’ti? ‘‘Saccaṃ, bhagavā’’ti. Vigarahi buddho bhagavā – ‘‘ananucchavikaṃ, moghapurisa, ananulomikaṃ appatirūpaṃ assāmaṇakaṃ akappiyaṃ akaraṇīyaṃ. Kathañhi nāma tvaṃ, moghapurisa, evaṃ svākkhāte dhammavinaye pabbajitvā na sakkhissasi yāvajīvaṃ paripuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ carituṃ! Nanu mayā, moghapurisa, anekapariyāyena virāgāya dhammo desito, no sarāgāya …pe… kāmapariḷāhānaṃ vūpasamo akkhāto! Varaṃ te, moghapurisa, āsīvisassa ghoravisassa mukhe aṅgajātaṃ pakkhittaṃ, na tveva makkaṭiyā aṅgajāte aṅgajātaṃ pakkhittaṃ. Varaṃ te, moghapurisa, kaṇhasappassa mukhe aṅgajātaṃ pakkhittaṃ, na tveva makkaṭiyā aṅgajāte aṅgajātaṃ pakkhittaṃ. Varaṃ te, moghapurisa, aṅgārakāsuyā ādittāya sampajjalitāya sajotibhūtāya aṅgajātaṃ pakkhittaṃ, na tveva makkaṭiyā aṅgajāte aṅgajātaṃ pakkhittaṃ. Taṃ kissa hetu? Tatonidānañhi, moghapurisa, maraṇaṃ vā nigaccheyya maraṇamattaṃ vā dukkhaṃ; na tveva tappaccayā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjeyya. Itonidānañca kho, moghapurisa, kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjeyya. Tattha nāma tvaṃ, moghapurisa, yaṃ tvaṃ asaddhammaṃ gāmadhammaṃ vasaladhammaṃ duṭṭhullaṃ odakantikaṃ rahassaṃ dvayaṃdvayasamāpattiṃ samāpajjissasi! Netaṃ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṃ vā pasādāya…pe… evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṃ sikkhāpadaṃ uddiseyyātha – ‘‘Yo pana bhikkhu methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭiseveyya antamaso tiracchānagatāyapi, pārājiko hoti asaṃvāso’’ti. Evañcidaṃ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṃ sikkhāpadaṃ paññattaṃ hoti.

[43] Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā vesālikā vajjiputtakā bhikkhū yāvadatthaṃ bhuñjiṃsu, yāvadatthaṃ supiṃsu, yāvadatthaṃ nhāyiṃsu. Yāvadatthaṃ bhuñjitvā yāvadatthaṃ supitvā yāvadatthaṃ nhāyitvā ayoniso manasi karitvā sikkhaṃ apaccakkhāya dubbalyaṃ anāvikatvā methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭiseviṃsu. Te aparena samayena ñātibyasanenapi phuṭṭhā bhogabyasanenapi phuṭṭhā rogabyasanenapi phuṭṭhā āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ upasaṅkamitvā evaṃ vadanti – ‘‘na mayaṃ, bhante ānanda, buddhagarahino na dhammagarahino na saṅghagarahino; attagarahino mayaṃ, bhante ānanda, anaññagarahino. Mayamevamhā alakkhikā mayaṃ appapuññā, ye mayaṃ evaṃ svākkhāte dhammavinaye pabbajitvā nāsakkhimhā yāvajīvaṃ paripuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ carituṃ. Idāni cepi mayaṃ, bhante ānanda, labheyyāma bhagavato santike pabbajjaṃ labheyyāma upasampadaṃ, idānipi mayaṃ vipassakā kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ pubbarattāpararattaṃ bodhipakkhikānaṃ dhammānaṃ bhāvanānuyogamanuyuttā vihareyyāma. Sādhu, bhante ānanda, bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocehī’’ti. ‘‘Evamāvuso’’ti kho āyasmā ānando vesālikānaṃ vajjiputtakānaṃ paṭissuṇitvā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocesi. ‘‘Aṭṭhānametaṃ, ānanda, anavakāso yaṃ tathāgato vajjīnaṃ vā vajjiputtakānaṃ vā kāraṇā sāvakānaṃ pārājikaṃ sikkhāpadaṃ paññattaṃ samūhaneyyā’’ti. Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṃ nidāne etasmiṃ pakaraṇe dhammiṃ kathaṃ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi – ‘‘yo, bhikkhave , sikkhaṃ apaccakkhāya dubbalyaṃ anāvikatvā methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevati so āgato na upasampādetabbo; yo ca kho, bhikkhave , sikkhaṃ paccakkhāya dubbalyaṃ āvikatvā methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevati so āgato upasampādetabbo. Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṃ sikkhāpadaṃ uddiseyyātha –
