Pārājikapāḷi — 1. Pārājikakaṇḍaṃ
vin01m.mul.xml, verses 117-126

[117] "Many-footed" means: scorpions, centipedes, caterpillars. If with thievish mind he touches one worth five māsakas or more than five māsakas, there is an offence of wrong-doing. If he makes it stir, there is a grave offence. If he shifts it from its place, there is an offence entailing defeat. If, thinking "I shall lead it away on foot," he makes it move, then with each step there is a grave offence; when he makes it move its last foot, there is an offence entailing defeat.

[118] "Scout" means: having scouted out goods, he tells someone, "Steal the goods called such-and-such" — there is an offence of wrong-doing. When that one steals those goods, there is an offence entailing defeat for both. "Warehouse-guard" means: guarding goods that have been brought in, if with thievish mind he touches something worth five māsakas or more than five māsakas, there is an offence of wrong-doing. If he makes it stir, there is a grave offence. If he shifts it from its place, there is an offence entailing defeat. "Theft by arrangement" means: several having made an arrangement together, one of them steals the goods — there is an offence entailing defeat for all of them.

[119] "Making an appointed sign" means: he makes an appointment, saying, "Before the meal, or after the meal, or by night, or by day, by that appointed sign steal those goods" — there is an offence of wrong-doing. If he steals those goods by that appointed sign, there is an offence entailing defeat for both. If he steals those goods before or after that appointed time, there is no offence for the one who instigated it; for the one who steals there is an offence entailing defeat.

[120] "Making a signal" means: he makes a signal, saying, "I shall wink my eye, or raise my eyebrow, or lift my head; at that signal steal those goods" — there is an offence of wrong-doing. If he steals those goods at that signal, there is an offence entailing defeat for both. If he steals those goods before or after that signal, there is no offence for the one who instigated it; for the one who steals there is an offence entailing defeat.

[121] A bhikkhu commands a bhikkhu: "Steal the goods called such-and-such" — there is an offence of wrong-doing. If, perceiving them as those goods, he steals those goods, there is an offence entailing defeat for both. A bhikkhu commands a bhikkhu: "Steal the goods called such-and-such" — there is an offence of wrong-doing. If, perceiving them as those goods, he steals other goods, there is no offence for the one who instigated it; for the one who steals there is an offence entailing defeat. A bhikkhu commands a bhikkhu: "Steal the goods called such-and-such" — there is an offence of wrong-doing. If, perceiving them as other goods, he steals those goods, there is an offence entailing defeat for both. A bhikkhu commands a bhikkhu: "Steal the goods called such-and-such" — there is an offence of wrong-doing. If, perceiving them as other goods, he steals other goods, there is no offence for the one who instigated it; for the one who steals there is an offence entailing defeat. A bhikkhu commands a bhikkhu: "Tell so-and-so: 'Let so-and-so tell so-and-so: let so-and-so steal the goods called such-and-such'" — there is an offence of wrong-doing. When he informs the next one, there is an offence of wrong-doing. When the one who is to steal accepts the commission, there is a grave offence for the original instigator. When that one steals the goods, there is an offence entailing defeat for all of them. A bhikkhu commands a bhikkhu: "Tell so-and-so: 'Let so-and-so tell so-and-so: let so-and-so steal the goods called such-and-such'" — there is an offence of wrong-doing. If he commands someone else, there is an offence of wrong-doing. When the one who is to steal accepts the commission, there is an offence of wrong-doing. When that one steals the goods, there is no offence for the original instigator; for the one who gave the command and for the one who steals there is an offence entailing defeat. A bhikkhu commands a bhikkhu: "Steal the goods called such-and-such" — there is an offence of wrong-doing. That one goes and comes back again, saying, "I am not able to steal those goods." He commands him again: "When you are able, then steal those goods" — there is an offence of wrong-doing. When that one steals the goods, there is an offence entailing defeat for both. A bhikkhu commands a bhikkhu: "Steal the goods called such-and-such" — there is an offence of wrong-doing. Having commanded him, he becomes remorseful but does not make it heard: "Do not steal them." When that one steals the goods, there is an offence entailing defeat for both. A bhikkhu commands a bhikkhu: "Steal the goods called such-and-such" — there is an offence of wrong-doing. Having commanded him, he becomes remorseful and makes it heard: "Do not steal them." If that one says, "I was commanded by you," and steals the goods, there is no offence for the original instigator; for the one who steals there is an offence entailing defeat. A bhikkhu commands a bhikkhu: "Steal the goods called such-and-such" — there is an offence of wrong-doing. Having commanded him, he becomes remorseful and makes it heard: "Do not steal them." If that one says, "Very well," and desists, there is no offence for either of them.

[122] For one who takes what is not given, in five ways there is an offence entailing defeat: it is owned by another, and he perceives it as owned by another, and the article is valuable, worth five māsakas or more than five māsakas, and there is a thievish mind present. He touches it: an offence of wrong-doing. He makes it stir: a grave offence. He shifts it from its place: an offence entailing defeat.

[123] For one who takes what is not given, in five ways there is a grave offence: it is owned by another, and he perceives it as owned by another, and the article is of small value, worth more than a māsaka but less than five māsakas, and there is a thievish mind present. He touches it: an offence of wrong-doing. He makes it stir: an offence of wrong-doing. He shifts it from its place: a grave offence.

[124] For one who takes what is not given, in five ways there is an offence of wrong-doing: it is owned by another, and he perceives it as owned by another, and the article is of small value, worth a māsaka or less than a māsaka, and there is a thievish mind present. He touches it: an offence of wrong-doing. He makes it stir: an offence of wrong-doing. He shifts it from its place: an offence of wrong-doing.

[125] For one who takes what is not given, in six ways there is an offence entailing defeat: he does not perceive it as his own, and he does not take it on trust, and it is not a temporary borrowing, and the article is valuable, worth five māsakas or more than five māsakas, and there is a thievish mind present. He touches it: an offence of wrong-doing. He makes it stir: a grave offence. He shifts it from its place: an offence entailing defeat.

[126] For one who takes what is not given, in six ways there is a grave offence: he does not perceive it as his own, and he does not take it on trust, and it is not a temporary borrowing, and the article is of small value, worth more than a māsaka but less than five māsakas, and there is a thievish mind present. He touches it: an offence of wrong-doing. He makes it stir: an offence of wrong-doing. He shifts it from its place: a grave offence.

----------------------------------------
Traditional Chinese:

[117] 多足者，謂蠍、蜈蚣、毛蟲之類。若以盜心觸摸值五摩沙迦或過五摩沙迦者，犯突吉羅。令動搖者，犯偷蘭遮。移離本處者，犯波羅夷。若念「我當令其步行而去」而使之移步，每移一步犯偷蘭遮；移最後一足時，犯波羅夷。

[118] 偵探者，謂偵察財物後告知：「汝可盜取某名之物」，犯突吉羅。彼盜取其物時，二人俱犯波羅夷。守贓者，謂看守所搬來之財物者，若以盜心觸摸值五摩沙迦或過五摩沙迦之物，犯突吉羅。令動搖者，犯偷蘭遮。移離本處者，犯波羅夷。共謀竊取者，謂眾人共同商議後，由一人盜取其物，則一切人皆犯波羅夷。

[119] 約定作者，謂作約定：「於食前、或食後、或夜、或晝，依此約定盜取彼物」，犯突吉羅。若依其約定盜取彼物，二人俱犯波羅夷。若於該約定之前或之後而盜取彼物者，本源者無罪，盜取者犯波羅夷。

[120] 作相者，謂作暗號：「我當眨眼、或揚眉、或舉頭，依此暗號盜取彼物」，犯突吉羅。若依其暗號盜取彼物，二人俱犯波羅夷。若於該暗號之前或之後而盜取彼物者，本源者無罪，盜取者犯波羅夷。

[121] 比丘命令比丘：「汝盜取某名之物」，犯突吉羅。彼認作該物而盜取該物，二人俱犯波羅夷。比丘命令比丘：「汝盜取某名之物」，犯突吉羅。彼認作該物而盜取他物，本源者無罪，盜取者犯波羅夷。比丘命令比丘：「汝盜取某名之物」，犯突吉羅。彼認作他物而盜取該物，二人俱犯波羅夷。比丘命令比丘：「汝盜取某名之物」，犯突吉羅。彼認作他物而盜取他物，本源者無罪，盜取者犯波羅夷。比丘命令比丘：「汝告訴某甲：『令某甲告訴某乙——令某乙盜取某名之物』」，犯突吉羅。彼轉告他人時，犯突吉羅。盜取者承受其事時，本源者犯偷蘭遮。彼盜取其物時，一切人皆犯波羅夷。比丘命令比丘：「汝告訴某甲：『令某甲告訴某乙——令某乙盜取某名之物』」，犯突吉羅。彼卻命令另一人，犯突吉羅。盜取者承受其事，犯突吉羅。彼盜取其物時，本源者無罪，命令者與盜取者犯波羅夷。比丘命令比丘：「汝盜取某名之物」，犯突吉羅。彼去而復返曰：「我不能盜取彼物。」彼復命令：「汝何時能，即於彼時盜取彼物」，犯突吉羅。彼盜取其物時，二人俱犯波羅夷。比丘命令比丘：「汝盜取某名之物」，犯突吉羅。彼命令後心生悔恨，然未令對方聞知「勿取」。彼盜取其物時，二人俱犯波羅夷。比丘命令比丘：「汝盜取某名之物」，犯突吉羅。彼命令後心生悔恨，令對方聞知：「勿取。」彼曰：「汝已命我」，而盜取其物，本源者無罪，盜取者犯波羅夷。比丘命令比丘：「汝盜取某名之物」，犯突吉羅。彼命令後心生悔恨，令對方聞知：「勿取。」彼答：「善哉」而止息不作，二人俱無罪。

[122] 以五種相狀取不與取者，犯波羅夷：一、是他人所攝屬之物；二、有他人所攝屬之想；三、其資具為貴重物；四、值五摩沙迦或過五摩沙迦；五、盜心現前。觸摸者，犯突吉羅。令動搖者，犯偷蘭遮。移離本處者，犯波羅夷。

[123] 以五種相狀取不與取者，犯偷蘭遮：一、是他人所攝屬之物；二、有他人所攝屬之想；三、其資具為輕賤物；四、值過一摩沙迦而不滿五摩沙迦；五、盜心現前。觸摸者，犯突吉羅。令動搖者，犯突吉羅。移離本處者，犯偷蘭遮。

[124] 以五種相狀取不與取者，犯突吉羅：一、是他人所攝屬之物；二、有他人所攝屬之想；三、其資具為輕賤物；四、值一摩沙迦或不滿一摩沙迦；五、盜心現前。觸摸者，犯突吉羅。令動搖者，犯突吉羅。移離本處者，犯突吉羅。

[125] 以六種相狀取不與取者，犯波羅夷：一、非有己物之想；二、非親厚取；三、非暫時取用；四、其資具為貴重物；五、值五摩沙迦或過五摩沙迦；六、盜心現前。觸摸者，犯突吉羅。令動搖者，犯偷蘭遮。移離本處者，犯波羅夷。

[126] 以六種相狀取不與取者，犯偷蘭遮：一、非有己物之想；二、非親厚取；三、非暫時取用；四、其資具為輕賤物；五、值過一摩沙迦而不滿五摩沙迦；六、盜心現前。觸摸者，犯突吉羅。令動搖者，犯突吉羅。移離本處者，犯偷蘭遮。

----------------------------------------
Original (Pali, IAST):

[117] Bahuppadaṃ nāma – vicchikā satapadī uccāliṅgapāṇakā. Pañcamāsakaṃ vā atirekapañcamāsakaṃ vā agghanakaṃ theyyacitto āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa. Phandāpeti, āpatti thullaccayassa. Ṭhānā cāveti, āpatti pārājikassa. Padasā nessāmīti saṅkāmeti, pade pade āpatti thullaccayassa. Pacchimaṃ pādaṃ saṅkāmeti, āpatti pārājikassa.

[118] Ocarako nāma bhaṇḍaṃ ocaritvā ācikkhati – ‘‘itthannāmaṃ bhaṇḍaṃ avaharā’’ti, āpatti dukkaṭassa. So taṃ bhaṇḍaṃ avaharati, āpatti ubhinnaṃ pārājikassa. Oṇirakkho nāma āhaṭaṃ bhaṇḍaṃ gopento pañcamāsakaṃ vā atirekapañcamāsakaṃ vā agghanakaṃ theyyacitto āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa. Phandāpeti, āpatti thullaccayassa. Ṭhānā cāveti, āpatti pārājikassa. Saṃvidāvahāro nāma sambahulā saṃvidahitvā eko bhaṇḍaṃ avaharati, āpatti sabbesaṃ pārājikassa.

[119] Saṅketakammaṃ nāma saṅketaṃ karoti – ‘‘purebhattaṃ vā pacchābhattaṃ vā rattiṃ vā divā vā tena saṅketena taṃ bhaṇḍaṃ avaharā’’ti, āpatti dukkaṭassa. Tena saṅketena taṃ bhaṇḍaṃ avaharati, āpatti ubhinnaṃ pārājikassa. Taṃ saṅketaṃ pure vā pacchā vā taṃ bhaṇḍaṃ avaharati, mūlaṭṭhassa anāpatti. Avahārakassa āpatti pārājikassa.

[120] Nimittakammaṃ nāma nimittaṃ karoti. Akkhiṃ vā nikhaṇissāmi bhamukaṃ vā ukkhipissāmi sīsaṃ vā ukkhipissāmi, tena nimittena taṃ bhaṇḍaṃ avaharāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa. Tena nimittena taṃ bhaṇḍaṃ avaharati, āpatti ubhinnaṃ pārājikassa. Taṃ nimittaṃ pure vā pacchā vā taṃ bhaṇḍaṃ avaharati, mūlaṭṭhassa anāpatti. Avahārakassa āpatti pārājikassa.

[121] Bhikkhu bhikkhuṃ āṇāpeti – ‘‘itthannāmaṃ bhaṇḍaṃ avaharā’’ti, āpatti dukkaṭassa. So taṃ maññamāno taṃ avaharati, āpatti ubhinnaṃ pārājikassa. Bhikkhu bhikkhuṃ āṇāpeti – ‘‘itthannāmaṃ bhaṇḍaṃ avaharā’’ti, āpatti dukkaṭassa. So taṃ maññamāno aññaṃ avaharati, mūlaṭṭhassa anāpatti. Avahārakassa āpatti pārājikassa. Bhikkhu bhikkhuṃ āṇāpeti – ‘‘itthannāmaṃ bhaṇḍaṃ avaharā’’ti, āpatti dukkaṭassa. So aññaṃ maññamāno taṃ avaharati, āpatti ubhinnaṃ pārājikassa. Bhikkhu bhikkhuṃ āṇāpeti – ‘‘itthannāmaṃ bhaṇḍaṃ avaharā’’ti, āpatti dukkaṭassa. So aññaṃ maññamāno aññaṃ avaharati, mūlaṭṭhassa anāpatti. Avahārakassa āpatti pārājikassa. Bhikkhu bhikkhuṃ āṇāpeti – ‘‘itthannāmassa pāvada – ‘itthannāmo itthannāmassa pāvadatu – itthannāmo itthannāmaṃ bhaṇḍaṃ avaharatū’’’ti, āpatti dukkaṭassa. So itarassa āroceti, āpatti dukkaṭassa. Avahārako paṭiggaṇhāti, mūlaṭṭhassa āpatti thullaccayassa. So taṃ bhaṇḍaṃ avaharati, āpatti sabbesaṃ pārājikassa. Bhikkhu bhikkhuṃ āṇāpeti – ‘‘itthannāmassa pāvada – ‘itthannāmo itthannāmassa pāvadatu – itthannāmo itthannāmaṃ bhaṇḍaṃ avaharatū’’’ti, āpatti dukkaṭassa. So aññaṃ āṇāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa. Avahārako paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa. So taṃ bhaṇḍaṃ avaharati, mūlaṭṭhassa anāpatti. Āṇāpakassa ca avahārakassa ca āpatti pārājikassa. Bhikkhu bhikkhuṃ āṇāpeti – ‘‘itthannāmaṃ bhaṇḍaṃ avaharā’’ti, āpatti dukkaṭassa. So gantvā puna paccāgacchati – ‘‘nāhaṃ sakkomi taṃ bhaṇḍaṃ avaharitu’’nti. So puna āṇāpeti – ‘‘yadā sakkosi tadā taṃ bhaṇḍaṃ avaharā’’ti, āpatti dukkaṭassa. So taṃ bhaṇḍaṃ avaharati, āpatti ubhinnaṃ pārājikassa. Bhikkhu bhikkhuṃ āṇāpeti – ‘‘itthannāmaṃ bhaṇḍaṃ avaharā’’ti, āpatti dukkaṭassa. So āṇāpetvā vippaṭisārī na sāveti – ‘‘mā avaharī’’ti. So taṃ bhaṇḍaṃ avaharati, āpatti ubhinnaṃ pārājikassa. Bhikkhu bhikkhuṃ āṇāpeti – ‘‘itthannāmaṃ bhaṇḍaṃ avaharā’’ti, āpatti dukkaṭassa. So āṇāpetvā vippaṭisārī sāveti – ‘‘mā avaharī’’ti. So ‘‘āṇatto ahaṃ tayā’’ti, taṃ bhaṇḍaṃ avaharati, mūlaṭṭhassa anāpatti. Avahārakassa āpatti pārājikassa. Bhikkhu bhikkhuṃ āṇāpeti – ‘‘itthannāmaṃ bhaṇḍaṃ avaharā’’ti, āpatti dukkaṭassa. So āṇāpetvā vippaṭisārī sāveti – ‘‘mā avaharī’’ti. So ‘‘sādhū’’ti ? Oramati, ubhinnaṃ anāpatti.

[122] Pañcahi ākārehi adinnaṃ ādiyantassa āpatti pārājikassa – parapariggahitañca hoti, parapariggahitasaññī ca, garuko ca hoti parikkhāro, pañcamāsako vā atirekapañcamāsako vā, theyyacittañca paccupaṭṭhitaṃ hoti. Āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa. Phandāpeti, āpatti thullaccayassa. Ṭhānā cāveti, āpatti pārājikassa.

[123] Pañcahi ākārehi adinnaṃ ādiyantassa āpatti thullaccayassa – parapariggahitañca hoti, parapariggahitasaññī ca, lahuko ca hoti parikkhāro, atirekamāsako vā ūnapañcamāsako vā, theyyacittañca paccupaṭṭhitaṃ hoti. Āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa. Phandāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa. Ṭhānā cāveti, āpatti thullaccayassa.

[124] Pañcahi ākārehi adinnaṃ ādiyantassa āpatti dukkaṭassa. Parapariggahitañca hoti, parapariggahitasaññī ca, lahuko ca hoti parikkhāro, māsako vā ūnamāsako vā, theyyacittañca paccupaṭṭhitaṃ hoti. Āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa. Phandāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa. Ṭhānā cāveti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.

[125] Chahi ākārehi adinnaṃ ādiyantassa āpatti pārājikassa. Na ca sakasaññī, na ca vissāsaggāhī, na ca tāvakālikaṃ, garuko ca hoti parikkhāro, pañcamāsako vā atirekapañcamāsako vā, theyyacittañca paccupaṭṭhitaṃ hoti. Āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭasa. Phandāpeti, āpatti thullaccayassa. Ṭhānā cāveti, āpatti pārājikassa.

[126] Chahi ākārehi adinnaṃ ādiyantassa āpatti thullaccayassa. Na ca sakasaññī, na ca vissāsaggāhī, na ca tāvakālikaṃ, lahuko ca hoti parikkhāro atirekamāsako vā ūnapañcamāsako vā, theyyacittañca paccupaṭṭhitaṃ hoti. Āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa. Phandāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa. Ṭhānā cāveti, āpatti thullaccayassa.
