Pārājikapāḷi — 1. Pārājikakaṇḍaṃ
vin01m.mul.xml, verses 152-161

[152] Now at that time a certain bhikkhu was travelling along the high road together with a caravan. A certain man, having won that bhikkhu over with material gifts, on seeing the toll-station gave him a costly jewel, saying: "Venerable sir, get this jewel past the toll-station." Then that bhikkhu got the jewel past the toll-station. He became remorseful... (and so on)... "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat."

[153] Now at that time a certain bhikkhu, out of compassion, released a pig caught in a snare. He became remorseful... (and so on)... "With what intention did you act, bhikkhu?" "My purpose was compassion, Blessed One." "There is no offence, bhikkhu, for one whose purpose is compassion." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu released a pig caught in a snare with thievish mind, thinking, "Before the owners see it." He became remorseful... (and so on)... "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu, out of compassion, released a deer caught in a snare... released a deer caught in a snare with thievish mind, thinking, "Before the owners see it"... out of compassion released fish caught in a fish-trap... released fish caught in a fish-trap with thievish mind, thinking, "Before the owners see it." He became remorseful... (and so on)... "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu, seeing goods in a cart, thought: "If I take them from here I shall be one defeated," and going ahead of it he made them roll off and took them. He became remorseful... (and so on)... "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu took a piece of meat that had been carried off by a hawk, thinking: "I will give it to the owners." The owners reproached that bhikkhu: "You are not an ascetic." He became remorseful... (and so on)... "There is no offence, bhikkhu, for one without thievish mind." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu took a piece of meat that had been carried off by a hawk, with thievish mind, thinking: "Before the owners see it." The owners reproached that bhikkhu: "You are not an ascetic." He became remorseful... (and so on)... "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat."

[154] Now at that time some people, having bound together a raft, were floating it down the river Aciravatī. The fastening broke and the timbers were scattered and drifted away. Bhikkhus, perceiving them as rags from a dust-heap, drew them out. The owners reproached those bhikkhus: "You are not ascetics." They became remorseful... (and so on)... "There is no offence, bhikkhus, for one who perceives it as a rag from a dust-heap." Now at that time some people, having bound together a raft, were floating it down the river Aciravatī. The fastening broke and the timbers were scattered and drifted away. Bhikkhus with thievish mind drew them out, thinking, "Before the owners see them." The owners reproached those bhikkhus: "You are not ascetics." They became remorseful... (and so on)... "Bhikkhus, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain cowherd hung his cloth on a tree and went off to relieve himself. A certain bhikkhu, perceiving it as a rag from a dust-heap, took it. Then that cowherd reproached the bhikkhu: "You are not an ascetic." He became remorseful... (and so on)... "There is no offence, bhikkhu, for one who perceives it as a rag from a dust-heap." Now at that time, as a certain bhikkhu was crossing a river, a cloth that had slipped from the hands of the washermen caught on his foot. That bhikkhu took it, thinking: "I will give it to the owners." The owners reproached that bhikkhu: "You are not an ascetic." He became remorseful... (and so on)... "There is no offence, bhikkhu, for one without thievish mind." Now at that time, as a certain bhikkhu was crossing a river, a cloth that had slipped from the hands of the washermen caught on his foot. That bhikkhu took it with thievish mind, thinking: "Before the owners see it." The owners reproached that bhikkhu: "You are not an ascetic." He became remorseful... (and so on)... "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat."

[155] Now at that time a certain bhikkhu, seeing a jar of ghee, consumed a little at a time. He became remorseful... (and so on)... "There is no offence entailing defeat, bhikkhu; there is an offence of wrong-doing." Now at that time several bhikkhus went off by arrangement, saying: "We shall steal goods." One of them stole the goods. They said: "We are not defeated; the one who stole is the one defeated." They reported this matter to the Blessed One... "Bhikkhus, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time several bhikkhus, having by arrangement stolen goods, divided them up. When they divided them, the portion of each one did not amount to five māsakas. They said: "We are not defeated." They reported this matter to the Blessed One. "Bhikkhus, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu, during a famine at Sāvatthī, stole with thievish mind a handful of rice from a shopkeeper. He became remorseful... (and so on)... "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu, during a famine at Sāvatthī, stole with thievish mind a handful of mung beans from a shopkeeper... a handful of black gram... a handful of sesame. He became remorseful... (and so on)... "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time in the Blind Men's Grove at Sāvatthī some thieves killed a cow, ate the meat, put aside what was left, and went off. Bhikkhus, perceiving it as a rag from a dust-heap, had it formally offered to them and consumed it. The thieves reproached those bhikkhus: "You are not ascetics." They became remorseful... (and so on)... "There is no offence, bhikkhus, for one who perceives it as a rag from a dust-heap." Now at that time in the Blind Men's Grove at Sāvatthī some thieves killed a pig, ate the meat, put aside what was left, and went off. Bhikkhus, perceiving it as a rag from a dust-heap, had it formally offered to them and consumed it. The thieves reproached those bhikkhus: "You are not ascetics." They became remorseful... (and so on)... "There is no offence, bhikkhus, for one who perceives it as a rag from a dust-heap." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu went to a grass-field and with thievish mind stole cut grass worth five māsakas. He became remorseful... (and so on)... "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu went to a grass-field, mowed grass, and with thievish mind stole it, worth five māsakas. He became remorseful... (and so on)... "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat."

[156] Now at that time incoming bhikkhus had the Saṅgha's mangoes distributed and consumed them. The resident bhikkhus reproached those bhikkhus: "You are not ascetics." They became remorseful... (and so on)... they reported this matter to the Blessed One. "With what intention did you act, bhikkhus?" "For the sake of eating them, Blessed One." "There is no offence, bhikkhus, when it is for the sake of eating." Now at that time incoming bhikkhus had the Saṅgha's rose-apples... the Saṅgha's breadfruit... the Saṅgha's jackfruit... the Saṅgha's palm-fruit... the Saṅgha's sugar-cane... the Saṅgha's timbarūsaka fruit distributed and consumed them. The resident bhikkhus reproached those bhikkhus: "You are not ascetics." They became remorseful... (and so on)... "There is no offence, bhikkhus, when it is for the sake of eating." Now at that time mango-keepers gave mango fruit to bhikkhus. The bhikkhus, being scrupulous, did not accept, thinking: "These men have authority to guard them, not to give them away." They reported this matter to the Blessed One. "There is no offence, bhikkhus, in a gift by a keeper." Now at that time rose-apple keepers... breadfruit keepers... jackfruit keepers... palm-fruit keepers... sugar-cane keepers... timbarūsaka keepers gave timbarūsaka fruit to bhikkhus. The bhikkhus, being scrupulous, did not accept, thinking: "These men have authority to guard them, not to give them away." They reported this matter to the Blessed One. "There is no offence, bhikkhus, in a gift by a keeper." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu took some of the Saṅgha's timber as a temporary borrowing and propped up the wall of his own dwelling. The bhikkhus reproached that bhikkhu: "You are not an ascetic." He became remorseful. He reported this matter to the Blessed One. "With what intention did you act, bhikkhu?" "It was a temporary borrowing, Blessed One." "There is no offence, bhikkhu, in a temporary borrowing." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu stole with thievish mind the Saṅgha's water... stole with thievish mind the Saṅgha's clay... stole with thievish mind the Saṅgha's heaped-up grass... He became remorseful... (and so on)... "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu with thievish mind burned up the Saṅgha's heaped-up grass. He became remorseful... (and so on)... "There is no offence entailing defeat, bhikkhu; there is an offence of wrong-doing." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu stole with thievish mind the Saṅgha's bed... He became remorseful... (and so on)... "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu with thievish mind stole the Saṅgha's chair... the Saṅgha's mattress... the Saṅgha's pillow... the Saṅgha's door... the Saṅgha's window... the Saṅgha's rafter... He became remorseful... (and so on)... "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat."

[157] Now at that time bhikkhus used elsewhere lodging furniture that a certain lay follower had given for use in a particular dwelling. Then that lay follower complained, grumbled and criticised: "How can the venerable ones use elsewhere what is for use in one place!" They reported this matter to the Blessed One. "Bhikkhus, what is for use in one place should not be used elsewhere. Whoever should so use it commits an offence of wrong-doing." Now at that time bhikkhus, being scrupulous about carrying things even to the Uposatha hall or to an assembly, sat on the bare ground, and both their limbs and their robes became soiled with dust. They reported this matter to the Blessed One. "I allow you, bhikkhus, to carry things off as a temporary borrowing." Now at that time at Campā a bhikkhunī who was a pupil of the bhikkhunī Thullanandā went to a family that supported the bhikkhunī Thullanandā and said: "The noble lady wishes to drink gruel with the three pungent ingredients," and having had it cooked and carried it off, she consumed it herself. Thullanandā, coming to know of it, reproached her: "You are not a female ascetic." She became remorseful. Then that bhikkhunī reported this matter to the bhikkhunīs. The bhikkhunīs reported this matter to the bhikkhus. The bhikkhus reported this matter to the Blessed One. "There is no offence entailing defeat, bhikkhus; there is an offence of expiation for deliberate lying." Now at that time at Rājagaha a bhikkhunī who was a pupil of the bhikkhunī Thullanandā went to a family that supported the bhikkhunī Thullanandā and said: "The noble lady wishes to eat a honey-ball," and having had it made and carried it off, she consumed it herself. Thullanandā, coming to know of it, reproached her: "You are not a female ascetic." She became remorseful... (and so on)... "There is no offence entailing defeat, bhikkhus; there is an offence of expiation for deliberate lying."

[158] Now at that time at Vesālī the householder who supported the venerable Ajjuka had two boys, a son and a nephew. Then that householder said to the venerable Ajjuka: "Venerable sir, whichever of these two boys has faith and confidence, point out to him this hiding-place." Now at that time it was that householder's nephew who had faith and confidence. So the venerable Ajjuka pointed out that hiding-place to that boy. With that wealth he established a household and set up a charity. Then the householder's son said to the venerable Ānanda: "Venerable Ānanda, who is the heir of a father — the son or the nephew?" "The son, friend, is the heir of a father." "Venerable sir, this master Ajjuka pointed out our wealth to our cousin." "Friend, the venerable Ajjuka is not an ascetic." Then the venerable Ajjuka said to the venerable Ānanda: "Friend Ānanda, give me a judgment." Now at that time the venerable Upāli was on the side of the venerable Ajjuka. Then the venerable Upāli said to the venerable Ānanda: "Friend Ānanda, when someone is told by an owner, 'Point out this hiding-place to so-and-so,' and he points it out to him, what offence does he incur?" "He incurs nothing at all, venerable sir, not even so much as an offence of wrong-doing." "Friend, this venerable Ajjuka was told by the owner, 'Point out this hiding-place to so-and-so,' and he pointed it out to him. There is no offence, friend, for the venerable Ajjuka."

[159] Now at that time at Bārāṇasī the family that supported the venerable Pilindavaccha was raided by thieves, and two children were carried off. Then the venerable Pilindavaccha brought back those children by his psychic power and set them in the mansion. When people saw those children they said, "This is the power of the psychic potency of master Pilindavaccha," and they gained great confidence in the venerable Pilindavaccha. The bhikkhus complained, grumbled and criticised: "How can the venerable Pilindavaccha bring back children carried off by thieves!" They reported this matter to the Blessed One. "There is no offence, bhikkhus, for one possessed of psychic power in the range of his psychic power."

[160] Now at that time two bhikkhus were friends, Paṇḍuka and Kapila. One dwelt in a village, the other at Kosambī. Then, as that bhikkhu was going from the village to Kosambī, while he was crossing a river on the way, a roll of fat that had slipped from the hands of the pork-butchers caught on his foot. That bhikkhu took it, thinking: "I will give it to the owners." The owners reproached that bhikkhu: "You are not an ascetic." When he had come out of the water a cowherd woman saw him and said: "Come, venerable sir, engage in sexual intercourse." Thinking, "I am no ascetic anyway," he engaged in sexual intercourse with her, and having gone to Kosambī he reported this matter to the bhikkhus. The bhikkhus reported this matter to the Blessed One. "There is no offence entailing defeat, bhikkhus, in respect of taking what is not given; there is an offence entailing defeat in respect of engaging in sexual intercourse."

[161] Now at that time at Sāgalā a bhikkhu who was a co-resident pupil of the venerable Daḷhika, being oppressed by dissatisfaction, stole a shopkeeper's turban-cloth and said to the venerable Daḷhika: "Venerable sir, I am not an ascetic; I shall leave the Order." "What have you done, friend?" He reported the matter. Daḷhika had it brought and had it valued. When it was valued it was not worth five māsakas. "There is no offence entailing defeat, friend." And he gave him a talk on the Dhamma, and that bhikkhu became content.

----------------------------------------
Traditional Chinese:

[152] 爾時有一比丘與商隊同行路上。有一男子以財物利誘該比丘，見到稅關，便將一顆貴重的摩尼寶珠交給那位比丘——「大德！請把這顆寶珠帶過稅關。」於是那比丘便把該寶珠帶過了稅關。他心生追悔……乃至……「比丘！汝已犯波羅夷罪。」

[153] 爾時有一比丘出於憐愍，放走了被套索繫住的豬。他心生追悔……乃至……「比丘！汝以何心而作？」「世尊！我以憐愍為意。」「比丘！以憐愍為意者，無罪。」爾時有一比丘見被套索繫住的豬，心想：「趁物主未看見時。」便以盜心放走牠。他心生追悔……乃至……「比丘！汝已犯波羅夷罪。」爾時有一比丘出於憐愍放走被套索繫住的鹿……又有比丘見被套索繫住的鹿，心想：「趁物主未看見時。」便以盜心放走……又出於憐愍放走被籠網所困的魚……又心想：「趁物主未看見時。」以盜心放走被籠網所困的魚。他心生追悔……乃至……「比丘！汝已犯波羅夷罪。」爾時有一比丘見車上的貨物，心想：「若從此處取之，我將成波羅夷。」便越過去，使之滾落而後取之。他心生追悔……乃至……「比丘！汝已犯波羅夷罪。」爾時有一比丘見鷹所銜去的肉片，心想：「我當還給物主。」便取之。物主呵責那比丘——「汝非沙門！」他心生追悔……乃至……「比丘！無盜心者，無罪。」爾時有一比丘見鷹所銜去的肉片，心想：「趁物主未看見時。」便以盜心取之。物主呵責那比丘——「汝非沙門！」他心生追悔……乃至……「比丘！汝已犯波羅夷罪。」

[154] 爾時眾人綁紮木筏，順阿夷羅跋提河放流。綁繩斷裂，木材散落漂去。諸比丘作糞掃衣（無主物）之想而取上岸。物主呵責那些比丘——「汝等非沙門！」彼等心生追悔……乃至……「諸比丘！作無主物想者，無罪。」爾時眾人綁紮木筏，順阿夷羅跋提河放流。綁繩斷裂，木材散落漂去。諸比丘心想：「趁物主未看見時。」便以盜心取上岸。物主呵責那些比丘——「汝等非沙門！」彼等心生追悔……乃至……「諸比丘！汝等已犯波羅夷罪。」爾時有一牧牛人把衣掛在樹上去大便。有一比丘作糞掃衣想而取之。那牧牛人便呵責該比丘——「汝非沙門！」他心生追悔……乃至……「比丘！作糞掃衣想者，無罪。」爾時有一比丘渡河時，從染衣者手中漏失的布掛在他腳上。那比丘心想：「我當還給物主。」便取之。物主呵責那比丘——「汝非沙門！」他心生追悔……乃至……「比丘！無盜心者，無罪。」爾時有一比丘渡河時，從染衣者手中漏失的布掛在他腳上。那比丘心想：「趁物主未看見時。」便以盜心取之。物主呵責那比丘——「汝非沙門！」他心生追悔……乃至……「比丘！汝已犯波羅夷罪。」

[155] 爾時有一比丘見一甕酥，便一點一點地取食。他心生追悔……乃至……「比丘！非波羅夷罪，乃突吉羅罪。」爾時眾多比丘共謀而去，心想：「我等當盜取財物。」其中一人盜取了財物。彼等如是說：「我等非波羅夷，唯盜取者是波羅夷。」他們以此事白佛……「諸比丘！汝等已犯波羅夷罪。」爾時眾多比丘共謀盜取財物而後分之。分配時，每人所得之分不滿五摩沙迦。彼等如是說：「我等非波羅夷。」他們以此事白佛。「諸比丘！汝等已犯波羅夷罪。」爾時於舍衛城饑饉之時，有一比丘以盜心竊取商人的一把米。他心生追悔……乃至……「比丘！汝已犯波羅夷罪。」爾時於舍衛城饑饉之時，有一比丘以盜心竊取商人的一把綠豆……一把豆……一把胡麻。他心生追悔……乃至……「比丘！汝已犯波羅夷罪。」爾時於舍衛城闇林中，群賊殺牛食肉，將剩餘者藏起而去。諸比丘作糞掃衣（無主物）想，令人授與而食之。群賊呵責那些比丘——「汝等非沙門！」彼等心生追悔……乃至……「諸比丘！作無主物想者，無罪。」爾時於舍衛城闇林中，群賊殺豬食肉，將剩餘者藏起而去。諸比丘作無主物想，令人授與而食之。群賊呵責那些比丘——「汝等非沙門！」彼等心生追悔……乃至……「諸比丘！作無主物想者，無罪。」爾時有一比丘往草田，以盜心竊取已割下、值五摩沙迦之草。他心生追悔……乃至……「比丘！汝已犯波羅夷罪。」爾時有一比丘往草田，割草而以盜心竊取值五摩沙迦之草。他心生追悔……乃至……「比丘！汝已犯波羅夷罪。」

[156] 爾時客比丘們令人分僧伽之芒果而食之。住處比丘呵責那些比丘——「汝等非沙門！」彼等心生追悔……乃至……以此事白佛。「諸比丘！汝等以何心而作？」「世尊！我等為受用之故。」「諸比丘！為受用之故者，無罪。」爾時客比丘們令人分僧伽之蒲桃……僧伽之麵包果……僧伽之波那娑果……僧伽之多羅熟果……僧伽之甘蔗……僧伽之鎮頭迦果而食之。住處比丘呵責那些比丘——「汝等非沙門！」彼等心生追悔……乃至……「諸比丘！為受用之故者，無罪。」爾時守芒果園者以芒果供養諸比丘。諸比丘心想：「此等人只有看守之權，無施與之權。」心懷追悔而不受。以此事白佛。「諸比丘！守園者之施與，無罪。」爾時守蒲桃園者……守麵包果園者……守波那娑園者……守多羅果園者……守甘蔗園者……守鎮頭迦園者以鎮頭迦果供養諸比丘。諸比丘心想：「此等人只有看守之權，無施與之權。」心懷追悔而不受。以此事白佛。「諸比丘！守園者之施與，無罪。」爾時有一比丘暫時取用僧伽之木材，搬去支撐自己住處的牆壁。諸比丘呵責那比丘——「汝非沙門！」他心生追悔，以此事白佛。「比丘！汝以何心而作？」「世尊！我是暫時取用。」「比丘！暫時取用者，無罪。」爾時有一比丘以盜心竊取僧伽之水……以盜心竊取僧伽之泥土……以盜心竊取僧伽所積聚之草……他心生追悔……乃至……「比丘！汝已犯波羅夷罪。」爾時有一比丘以盜心燒燬僧伽所積聚之草。他心生追悔……乃至……「比丘！非波羅夷罪，乃突吉羅罪。」爾時有一比丘以盜心竊取僧伽之床……他心生追悔……乃至……「比丘！汝已犯波羅夷罪。」爾時有一比丘以盜心竊取僧伽之椅……僧伽之褥……僧伽之枕……僧伽之門扉……僧伽之窗……僧伽之椽木……他心生追悔……乃至……「比丘！汝已犯波羅夷罪。」

[157] 爾時諸比丘把某優婆塞為某精舍受用所施之臥具，拿到別處受用。於是那優婆塞譏嫌非難鄙斥——「諸大德怎麼可以把此處受用之物拿到他處受用呢！」以此事白佛。「諸比丘！不應把此處受用之物於他處受用。若受用者，犯突吉羅罪。」爾時諸比丘對於搬取〔臥具〕至布薩堂或集會處亦心懷追悔，遂坐於地上。身體與衣皆沾滿塵土。以此事白佛。「諸比丘！我聽許暫時取用而搬移。」爾時於瞻波城，偷蘭難陀比丘尼的弟子比丘尼前往偷蘭難陀比丘尼的護持信家，說：「聖者想喝三辛粥。」令人煮好，拿回後自己食用。偷蘭難陀知道後呵責她——「汝非沙門尼！」她心生追悔。於是那比丘尼以此事告諸比丘尼。諸比丘尼以此事告諸比丘。諸比丘以此事白佛。「諸比丘！非波羅夷罪；故妄語犯波逸提罪。」爾時於王舍城，偷蘭難陀比丘尼的弟子比丘尼前往偷蘭難陀比丘尼的護持信家，說：「聖者想吃蜜團。」令人作好，拿回後自己食用。偷蘭難陀知道後呵責她——「汝非沙門尼！」她心生追悔……乃至……「諸比丘！非波羅夷罪；故妄語犯波逸提罪。」

[158] 爾時於毗舍離，具壽阿豬迦的護持居士有兩個孩子——一是兒子，一是外甥。於是那居士對具壽阿豬迦說：「大德！這兩個孩子中，誰對〔佛法〕有信有淨信，請將此處〔藏寶之所〕告訴他。」爾時那居士的外甥有信有淨信。於是具壽阿豬迦便把那藏處告訴了那孩子。他以那財產既建立了家業，又行布施。後來那居士的兒子對具壽阿難說：「阿難大德！誰是父親的繼承人——是兒子還是外甥？」「友！兒子是父親的繼承人。」「大德！這位阿豬迦聖者把我們的財產告訴了我們的表兄。」「友！具壽阿豬迦非沙門。」於是具壽阿豬迦對具壽阿難說：「阿難友！請為我作判決。」爾時具壽優波離是具壽阿豬迦這一方的。於是具壽優波離對具壽阿難說：「阿難友！若有人被物主告知『此處請告訴某甲』，而他便告訴那人，他犯何罪呢？」「大德！他不犯任何罪，乃至突吉羅亦無。」「友！這位具壽阿豬迦被物主告知『此處請告訴某甲』，他便告訴了那人；友！具壽阿豬迦無罪。」

[159] 爾時於波羅奈，具壽畢陵伽婆蹉的護持信家遭盜賊侵擾，兩個孩子被擄走。於是具壽畢陵伽婆蹉以神通把那兩個孩子帶回，安置於樓閣上。眾人見到那兩個孩子，說：「這是畢陵伽婆蹉聖者的神通威力。」於是對具壽畢陵伽婆蹉極生淨信。諸比丘譏嫌非難鄙斥——「具壽畢陵伽婆蹉怎麼可以把盜賊擄走的孩子帶回呢！」以此事白佛。「諸比丘！有神通者於神通境界中〔所作〕，無罪。」

[160] 爾時有兩位比丘是朋友——般荼迦與迦毗羅。一人住在村落，一人住在憍賞彌。那時住村落的比丘前往憍賞彌，途中渡河，從屠豬者手中漏失的一片脂肉掛在他腳上。那比丘心想：「我當還給物主。」便取之。物主呵責那比丘——「汝非沙門！」他上岸時，一位牧牛女見了，對他說：「大德！來吧，行淫法。」他心想：「反正我本來已不是沙門了。」便與她行淫法，然後前往憍賞彌，以此事告諸比丘。諸比丘以此事白佛。「諸比丘！於不與取，非波羅夷罪；於行淫法結合，犯波羅夷罪。」

[161] 爾時於舍竭城，具壽達利迦的共住弟子比丘為不樂〔梵行〕所逼，盜取了商人的頭巾，然後對具壽達利迦說：「大德！我已非沙門，我將要還俗。」「友！汝作了什麼？」他便把此事說了。〔達利迦〕令人取來估價，估價結果不值五摩沙迦。「友！非波羅夷罪。」並為他說法。那比丘便重生歡喜〔於梵行〕。

----------------------------------------
Original (Pali, IAST):

[152] Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu satthena saddhiṃ addhānamaggappaṭipanno hoti. Aññataro puriso taṃ bhikkhuṃ āmisena upalāpetvā suṅkaṭṭhānaṃ passitvā mahagghaṃ maṇiṃ tassa bhikkhuno adāsi – ‘‘imaṃ, bhante, maṇiṃ suṅkaṭṭhānaṃ atikkāmehī’’ti. Atha kho so bhikkhu taṃ maṇiṃ suṅkaṭṭhānaṃ atikkāmesi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti.

[153] Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu pāse bandhaṃ sūkaraṃ kāruññena muñci. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘kiṃcitto tvaṃ, bhikkhū’’ti? ‘‘Kāruññādhippāyo ahaṃ, bhagavā’’ti. ‘‘Anāpatti, bhikkhu, kāruññādhippāyassā’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu pāse bandhaṃ sūkaraṃ – ‘‘pure sāmikā passantī’’ti, theyyacitto muñci. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu pāse bandhaṃ migaṃ kāruññena muñci… pāse bandhaṃ migaṃ – ‘‘pure sāmikā passantī’’ti, theyyacitto muñci … kumine bandhe macche kāruññena muñci… kumine bandhe macche – ‘‘pure sāmikā passantī’’ti theyyacitto muñci. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu yāne bhaṇḍaṃ passitvā – ‘‘ito gaṇhanto pārājiko bhavissāmī’’ti, atikkamitvā pavaṭṭetvā aggahesi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu kulalena ukkhittaṃ maṃsapesiṃ – ‘‘sāmikānaṃ dassāmī’’ti aggahesi. Sāmikā taṃ bhikkhuṃ codesuṃ – ‘‘assamaṇosi tva’’nti. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhu, atheyyacittassā’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu kulalena ukkhittaṃ maṃsapesiṃ – ‘‘pure sāmikā passantī’’ti, theyyacitto aggahesi. Sāmikā taṃ bhikkhuṃ codesuṃ – ‘‘assamaṇosi tva’’nti. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti.

[154] Tena kho pana samayena manussā uḷumpaṃ bandhitvā aciravatiyā nadiyā osārenti. Bandhane chinne kaṭṭhāni vippakiṇṇāni agamaṃsu. Bhikkhū paṃsukūlasaññino uttāresuṃ. Sāmikā te bhikkhū codesuṃ – ‘‘assamaṇāttha tumhe’’ti. Tesaṃ kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhave, paṃsukūlasaññissā’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena manussā uḷumpaṃ bandhitvā aciravatiyā nadiyā osārenti. Bandhane chinne kaṭṭhāni vippakiṇṇāni agamaṃsu. Bhikkhū – ‘‘pure sāmikā passantī’’ti, theyyacittā uttāresuṃ. Sāmikā te bhikkhū codesuṃ – ‘‘assamaṇāttha tumhe’’ti. Tesaṃ kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tumhe, bhikkhave, āpannā pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro gopālako rukkhe sāṭakaṃ ālaggetvā uccāraṃ agamāsi. Aññataro bhikkhu paṃsukūlasaññī aggahesi. Atha kho so gopālako taṃ bhikkhuṃ codesi – ‘‘assamaṇosi tva’’nti. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhu, paṃsukūlasaññissā’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena aññatarassa bhikkhuno nadiṃ tarantassa rajakānaṃ hatthato muttaṃ sāṭakaṃ pāde laggaṃ hoti. So bhikkhu – ‘‘sāmikānaṃ dassāmī’’ti aggahesi. Sāmikā taṃ bhikkhuṃ codesuṃ – ‘‘assamaṇosi tva’’nti. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhu, atheyyacittassā’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena aññatarassa bhikkhuno nadiṃ tarantassa rajakānaṃ hatthato muttaṃ sāṭakaṃ pāde laggaṃ hoti. So bhikkhu – ‘‘pure sāmikā passantī’’ti, theyyacitto aggahesi. Sāmikā taṃ bhikkhuṃ codesuṃ – ‘‘assamaṇosi tva’’nti. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti.

[155] Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu sappikumbhiṃ passitvā thokaṃ thokaṃ paribhuñji. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhu, pārājikassa; āpatti dukkaṭassā’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā bhikkhū saṃvidahitvā agamaṃsu – ‘‘bhaṇḍaṃ avaharissāmā’’ti. Eko bhaṇḍaṃ avahari. Te evamāhaṃsu – ‘‘na mayaṃ pārājikā. Yo avahaṭo so pārājiko’’ti. Bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocesuṃ… ‘‘āpattiṃ tumhe, bhikkhave, āpannā pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā bhikkhū saṃvidahitvā bhaṇḍaṃ avaharitvā bhājesuṃ. Tehi bhājīyamāne ekamekassa paṭiviso na pañcamāsako pūri. Te evamāhaṃsu – ‘‘na mayaṃ pārājikā’’ti. Bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocesuṃ. ‘‘Āpattiṃ tumhe, bhikkhave, āpannā pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu sāvatthiyaṃ dubbhikkhe āpaṇikassa taṇḍulamuṭṭhiṃ theyyacitto avahari. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu sāvatthiyaṃ dubbhikkhe āpaṇikassa muggamuṭṭhiṃ… māsamuṭṭhiṃ… tilamuṭṭhiṃ theyyacitto avahari. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu āpanno pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena sāvatthiyaṃ andhavane corakā gāviṃ hantvā maṃsaṃ khāditvā sesakaṃ paṭisāmetvā agamaṃsu. Bhikkhū paṃsukūlasaññino paṭiggahāpetvā paribhuñjiṃsu. Corakā te bhikkhū codesuṃ – ‘‘assamaṇāttha tumhe’’ti. Tesaṃ kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhave, paṃsukūlasaññissā’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena sāvatthiyaṃ andhavane corakā sūkaraṃ hantvā maṃsaṃ khāditvā sesakaṃ paṭisāmetvā agamaṃsu. Bhikkhū paṃsukūlasaññino paṭiggahāpetvā paribhuñjiṃsu. Corakā te bhikkhū codesuṃ – ‘‘assamaṇāttha tumhe’’ti. Tesaṃ kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhave, paṃsukūlasaññissā’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu tiṇakkhettaṃ gantvā lūtaṃ tiṇaṃ pañcamāsagghanakaṃ theyyacitto avahari. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi …pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu tiṇakkhettaṃ gantvā tiṇaṃ lāyitvā pañcamāsagghanakaṃ theyyacitto avahari. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti.

[156] Tena kho pana samayena āgantukā bhikkhū saṅghassa ambaṃ bhājāpetvā paribhuñjiṃsu. Āvāsikā bhikkhū te bhikkhū codesuṃ – ‘‘assamaṇāttha tumhe’’ti. Tesaṃ kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocesuṃ. ‘‘Kiṃcittā tumhe, bhikkhave’’ti? ‘‘Paribhogatthāya mayaṃ bhagavā’’ti. ‘‘Anāpatti, bhikkhave, paribhogatthāyā’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena āgantukā bhikkhū saṅghassa jambuṃ… saṅghassa labujaṃ… saṅghassa panasaṃ… saṅghassa tālapakkaṃ… saṅghassa ucchuṃ… saṅghassa timbarūsakaṃ bhājāpetvā paribhuñjiṃsu. Āvāsikā bhikkhū te bhikkhū codesuṃ – ‘‘assamaṇāttha, tumhe’’ti. Tesaṃ kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhave, paribhogatthāyā’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena ambapālakā bhikkhūnaṃ ambaphalaṃ denti. Bhikkhū – ‘‘gopetuṃ ime issarā, nayime dātu’’nti, kukkuccāyantā na paṭiggaṇhanti. Bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocesuṃ. ‘‘Anāpatti, bhikkhave, gopakassa dāne’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena jambupālakā… labujapālakā… panasapālakā… tālapakkapālakā… ucchupālakā… timbarūsakapālakā bhikkhūnaṃ timbarūsakaṃ denti. Bhikkhū – ‘‘gopetuṃ ime issarā, nayime dātu’’nti, kukkuccāyantā na paṭiggaṇhanti. Bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocesuṃ. ‘‘Anāpatti, bhikkhave, gopakassa dāne’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu saṅghassa dāruṃ tāvakālikaṃ haritvā attano vihārassa kuṭṭaṃ upatthambhesi. Bhikkhū taṃ bhikkhuṃ codesuṃ – ‘‘assamaṇosi tva’’nti. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi. Bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocesi. ‘‘Kiṃcitto tvaṃ, bhikkhū’’ti? ‘‘Tāvakāliko ahaṃ, bhagavā’’ti. ‘‘Anāpatti, bhikkhu, tāvakālike’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu saṅghassa udakaṃ theyyacitto avahari… saṅghassa mattikaṃ theyyacitto avahari… saṅghassa puñjakitaṃ tiṇaṃ theyyacitto avahari… tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu saṅghassa puñjakitaṃ tiṇaṃ theyyacitto jhāpesi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhu, pārājikassa. Āpatti dukkaṭassā’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu saṅghassa mañcaṃ theyyacitto avahari… tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu saṅghassa pīṭhaṃ… saṅghassa bhisiṃ… saṅghassa bibbohanaṃ … saṅghassa kavāṭaṃ… saṅghassa ālokasandhiṃ… saṅghassa gopānasiṃ theyyacitto avahari… tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti.

[157] Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhū aññatarassa upāsakassa vihāraparibhogaṃ senāsanaṃ aññatra paribhuñjanti. Atha kho so upāsako ujjhāyati khiyyati vipāceti – ‘‘kathañhi nāma bhadantā aññatra paribhogaṃ aññatra paribhuñjissantī’’ti! Bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocesuṃ. ‘‘Na, bhikkhave, aññatra paribhogo aññatra paribhuñjitabbo. Yo paribhuñjeyya, āpatti dukkaṭassā’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhū uposathaggampi sannisajjampi harituṃ kukkuccāyantā chamāyaṃ nisīdanti. Gattānipi cīvarānipi paṃsukitāni honti. Bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocesuṃ. ‘‘Anujānāmi, bhikkhave, tāvakālikaṃ haritu’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena campāyaṃ thullanandāya bhikkhuniyā antevāsinī bhikkhunī thullanandāya bhikkhuniyā upaṭṭhākakulaṃ gantvā – ‘‘ayyā icchati tekaṭulayāguṃ pātu’’nti, pacāpetvā haritvā attanā paribhuñji. Sā jānitvā taṃ codesi – ‘‘assamaṇīsi tva’’nti. Tassā kukkuccaṃ ahosi. Atha kho sā bhikkhunī bhikkhunīnaṃ etamatthaṃ ārocesi. Bhikkhuniyo bhikkhūnaṃ etamatthaṃ ārocesuṃ. Bhikkhū bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocesuṃ. ‘‘Anāpatti, bhikkhave, pārājikassa; āpatti sampajānamusāvāde pācittiyassā’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena rājagahe thullanandāya bhikkhuniyā antevāsinī bhikkhunī thullanandāya bhikkhuniyā upaṭṭhākakulaṃ gantvā – ‘‘ayyā icchati madhugoḷakaṃ khāditu’’nti, pacāpetvā haritvā attanā paribhuñji. Sā jānitvā taṃ codesi – ‘‘assamaṇīsi tva’’nti. Tassā kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhave, pārājikassa; āpatti sampajānamusāvāde pācittiyassā’’ti.

[158] Tena kho pana samayena vesāliyaṃ āyasmato ajjukassa upaṭṭhākassa gahapatino dve dārakā honti – putto ca bhāgineyyo ca. Atha kho so gahapati āyasmantaṃ ajjukaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘imaṃ, bhante, okāsaṃ yo imesaṃ dvinnaṃ dārakānaṃ saddho hoti pasanno tassa ācikkheyyāsī’’ti . Tena kho pana samayena tassa gahapatino bhāgineyyo saddho hoti pasanno. Atha kho āyasmā ajjuko taṃ okāsaṃ tassa dārakassa ācikkhi. So tena sāpateyyena kuṭumbañca saṇṭhapesi dānañca paṭṭhapesi. Atha kho tassa gahapatino putto āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘ko nu kho, bhante ānanda, pituno dāyajjo – putto vā bhāgineyyo vā’’ti? ‘‘Putto kho, āvuso, pituno dāyajjo’’ti. ‘‘Ayaṃ, bhante, ayyo ajjuko amhākaṃ sāpateyyaṃ amhākaṃ methunakassa ācikkhī’’ti. ‘‘Assamaṇo, āvuso, āyasmā ajjuko’’ti. Atha kho āyasmā ajjuko āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘dehi me, āvuso ānanda, vinicchaya’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā upāli āyasmato ajjukassa pakkho hoti. Atha kho āyasmā upāli āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘yo nu kho, āvuso ānanda, sāmikena ‘imaṃ okāsaṃ itthannāmassa ācikkheyyāsī’ti vutto tassa ācikkhati, kiṃ so āpajjatī’’ti? ‘‘Na, bhante, kiñci āpajjati, antamaso dukkaṭamattampī’’ti. ‘‘Ayaṃ, āvuso, āyasmā ajjuko sāmikena – ‘imaṃ okāsaṃ itthannāmassa ācikkhā’ti vutto tassa ācikkhati; anāpatti, āvuso, āyasmato ajjukassā’’ti.

[159] Tena kho pana samayena bārāṇasiyaṃ āyasmato pilindavacchassa upaṭṭhākakulaṃ corehi upaddutaṃ hoti. Dve ca dārakā nītā honti. Atha kho āyasmā pilindavaccho te dārake iddhiyā ānetvā pāsāde ṭhapesi. Manussā te dārake passitvā – ‘‘ayyassāyaṃ pilindavacchassa iddhānubhāvo’’ti, āyasmante pilindavacche abhippasīdiṃsu. Bhikkhū ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti – ‘‘kathañhi nāma āyasmā pilindavaccho corehi nīte dārake ānessatī’’ti! Bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocesuṃ. ‘‘Anāpatti, bhikkhave , iddhimassa iddhivisaye’’ti.

[160] Tena kho pana samayena dve bhikkhū sahāyakā honti – paṇḍuko ca kapilo ca. Eko gāmake viharati, eko kosambiyaṃ. Atha kho tassa bhikkhuno gāmakā kosambiṃ gacchantassa antarāmagge nadiṃ tarantassa sūkarikānaṃ hatthato muttā medavaṭṭi pāde laggā hoti. So bhikkhu – ‘‘sāmikānaṃ dassāmī’’ti aggahesi. Sāmikā taṃ bhikkhuṃ codesuṃ – ‘‘assamaṇosi tva’’nti. Taṃ uttiṇṇaṃ gopālikā passitvā etadavoca – ‘‘ehi, bhante, methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevā’’ti. So – ‘‘pakatiyāpāhaṃ assamaṇo’’ti tassā methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevitvā kosambiṃ gantvā bhikkhūnaṃ etamatthaṃ ārocesi. Bhikkhū bhagavato etamatthaṃ orocesuṃ. ‘‘Anāpatti, bhikkhave, adinnādāne pārājikassa; āpatti methunadhammasamāyoge pārājikassā’’ti.

[161] Tena kho pana samayena sāgalāyaṃ āyasmato daḷhikassa saddhivihāriko bhikkhu anabhiratiyā pīḷito āpaṇikassa veṭhanaṃ avaharitvā āyasmantaṃ daḷhikaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘assamaṇo ahaṃ, bhante, vibbhamissāmī’’ti. ‘‘Kiṃ tayā, āvuso, kata’’nti? So tamatthaṃ ārocesi. Āharāpetvā agghāpesi. Taṃ agghāpentaṃ na pañcamāsake agghati. ‘‘Anāpatti, āvuso, pārājikassā’’ti. Dhammakathaṃ akāsi. So bhikkhu abhiramatīti .
