Pārājikapāḷi — 1. Pārājikakaṇḍaṃ
vin01m.mul.xml, verses 124-143

[124] For one who takes what is not given, there is an offence of wrong-doing when there are five factors: it is possessed by another, and he perceives it as possessed by another, and the article is of trifling value, being one māsaka or less than a māsaka, and an intention to steal is present. If he touches it, there is an offence of wrong-doing. If he makes it shift, there is an offence of wrong-doing. If he moves it from its place, there is an offence of wrong-doing.

[125] For one who takes what is not given, there is an offence entailing defeat when there are six factors: he does not perceive it as his own, and he does not take it on trust, and he does not take it as a temporary loan, and the article is of substantial value, being five māsakas or more than five māsakas, and an intention to steal is present. If he touches it, there is an offence of wrong-doing. If he makes it shift, there is a grave offence. If he moves it from its place, there is an offence entailing defeat.

[126] For one who takes what is not given, there is a grave offence when there are six factors: he does not perceive it as his own, and he does not take it on trust, and he does not take it as a temporary loan, and the article is of trifling value, being more than a māsaka or less than five māsakas, and an intention to steal is present. If he touches it, there is an offence of wrong-doing. If he makes it shift, there is an offence of wrong-doing. If he moves it from its place, there is a grave offence.

[127] For one who takes what is not given, there is an offence of wrong-doing when there are six factors: he does not perceive it as his own, and he does not take it on trust, and he does not take it as a temporary loan, and the article is of trifling value, being one māsaka or less than a māsaka, and an intention to steal is present. If he touches it, there is an offence of wrong-doing. If he makes it shift, there is an offence of wrong-doing. If he moves it from its place, there is an offence of wrong-doing.

[128] For one who takes what is not given, there is an offence of wrong-doing when there are five factors: it is not possessed by another, but he perceives it as possessed by another, and the article is of substantial value, being five māsakas or more than five māsakas, and an intention to steal is present. If he touches it, there is an offence of wrong-doing. If he makes it shift, there is an offence of wrong-doing. If he moves it from its place, there is an offence of wrong-doing.

[129] For one who takes what is not given, there is an offence of wrong-doing when there are five factors: it is not possessed by another, but he perceives it as possessed by another, and the article is of trifling value, being more than a māsaka or less than five māsakas, and an intention to steal is present. If he touches it, there is an offence of wrong-doing. If he makes it shift, there is an offence of wrong-doing. If he moves it from its place, there is an offence of wrong-doing.

[130] For one who takes what is not given, there is an offence of wrong-doing when there are five factors: it is not possessed by another, but he perceives it as possessed by another, and the article is of trifling value, being one māsaka or less than a māsaka, and an intention to steal is present. If he touches it, there is an offence of wrong-doing. If he makes it shift, there is an offence of wrong-doing. If he moves it from its place, there is an offence of wrong-doing.

[131] There is no offence for one who perceives it as his own; for one who takes it on trust; for one who takes it as a temporary loan; in the case of property belonging to a departed spirit; in the case of property belonging to an animal; for one who perceives it as a discarded rag; for one who is insane; (for one who is deranged in mind, or overwhelmed by pain;) and for the first offender.

[132] Now at that time the monks of the group of six went to a dyers' drying-ground and stole a dyer's bundle. They became remorseful: "The Blessed One has laid down a training rule. Have we perhaps fallen into an offence entailing defeat?" They reported this matter to the Blessed One. "Monks, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain monk went to a dyers' drying-ground and, seeing a valuable cloth, an intention to steal arose in him. He became remorseful: "The Blessed One has laid down a training rule. Have I perhaps fallen into an offence entailing defeat?" He reported this matter to the Blessed One. "There is no offence, monk, in the mere arising of the thought." Now at that time a certain monk went to a dyers' drying-ground and, seeing a valuable cloth, touched it with intent to steal. He became remorseful… "There is no offence entailing defeat, monk; there is an offence of wrong-doing." Now at that time a certain monk went to a dyers' drying-ground and, seeing a valuable cloth, made it shift with intent to steal. He became remorseful… "There is no offence entailing defeat, monk; there is a grave offence." Now at that time a certain monk went to a dyers' drying-ground and, seeing a valuable cloth, moved it from its place with intent to steal. He became remorseful… "Monk, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat."

[133] Now at that time a certain monk who was going for alms saw a valuable upper covering, and an intention to steal arose in him… he touched it with intent to steal… he made it shift with intent to steal… he moved it from its place with intent to steal. He became remorseful… "Monk, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat."

[134] Now at that time a certain monk, having seen goods by day, made a mental note: "I will steal it at night." Thinking it was that object he stole that object… thinking it was that object he stole another… thinking it was another he stole that object… thinking it was another he stole another. He became remorseful… "Monk, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain monk, having seen goods by day, made a mental note: "I will steal it at night." Thinking it was that object, he took away his own goods. He became remorseful… "There is no offence entailing defeat, monk; there is an offence of wrong-doing." Now at that time a certain monk, carrying another's goods, touched the load on his head with intent to steal… made it shift with intent to steal… lowered it to his shoulder with intent to steal… touched the load on his shoulder with intent to steal… made it shift with intent to steal… lowered it to his hip with intent to steal… touched the load at his hip with intent to steal… made it shift with intent to steal… took it in his hand with intent to steal… placed the load that was in his hand on the ground with intent to steal… took it up from the ground with intent to steal. He became remorseful… "Monk, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat."

[135] Now at that time a certain monk spread out a robe in the open air and entered his dwelling. Another monk put it away, thinking, "Let this robe not be lost." The first came out and asked that monk, "Friend, by whom has my robe been taken away?" He said, "It was taken away by me." "He took it: you are not an ascetic!" He became remorseful… He reported this matter to the Blessed One. "Monk, what was your intention?" "It was merely a way of speaking, Blessed One." "There is no offence, monk, in a mere manner of speaking." Now at that time a certain monk, having laid a robe on a bench… having laid a sitting-cloth on a bench… having placed a bowl under a bench, entered his dwelling. Another monk put it away, thinking, "Let this bowl not be lost." The first came out and asked that monk, "Friend, by whom has my bowl been taken away?" He said, "It was taken away by me." "He took it: you are not an ascetic!" He became remorseful… "There is no offence, monk, in a mere manner of speaking." Now at that time a certain nun spread out a robe on a fence and entered her dwelling. Another nun put it away, thinking, "Let this robe not be lost." She came out and asked that nun, "Noble lady, by whom has my robe been taken away?" She said, "It was taken away by me." "She took it: you are not an ascetic!" She became remorseful. Then that nun reported this matter to the nuns; the nuns reported this matter to the monks; the monks reported this matter to the Blessed One… "There is no offence, monks, in a mere manner of speaking."

[136] Now at that time a certain monk saw a cloth lifted up by a whirlwind and took it, thinking, "I will give it to its owners." The owners reproached that monk: "You are not an ascetic!" He became remorseful… "Monk, what was your intention?" "I had no intention to steal, Blessed One." "There is no offence, monk, for one without intention to steal." Now at that time a certain monk saw a turban lifted up by a whirlwind and took it with intent to steal, thinking, "Before the owners see it." The owners reproached that monk: "You are not an ascetic!" He became remorseful… "Monk, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat."

[137] Now at that time a certain monk went to a charnel ground and took a rag-cloth from a corpse that was not yet decomposed. And a departed spirit was dwelling in that corpse. Then that spirit said to the monk, "Venerable sir, do not take my cloth." That monk went off paying no heed. Then that corpse rose up and followed close behind that monk. Then that monk entered his dwelling and shut the door. Then that corpse fell down right there. He became remorseful… "There is no offence entailing defeat, monk. But, monks, a rag-cloth should not be taken from a corpse that is not yet decomposed. Whoever should take one commits an offence of wrong-doing."

[138] Now at that time, when robes were being distributed by the Saṅgha, a certain monk with intent to steal shifted the lot and took a robe. He became remorseful… "Monk, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat."

[139] Now at that time the venerable Ānanda, in the bathhouse, put on another monk's inner robe, thinking it was his own. Then that monk said to the venerable Ānanda, "Friend Ānanda, why have you put on my inner robe?" "I perceived it as my own, friend." They reported this matter to the Blessed One. "There is no offence, monks, for one who perceives it as his own."

[140] Now at that time a number of monks, coming down from Mount Gijjhakūṭa, saw the leavings of a lion's kill, had it cooked, and ate it. They became remorseful… "There is no offence, monks, in the case of a lion's leavings." Now at that time a number of monks, coming down from Mount Gijjhakūṭa, saw the leavings of a tiger's kill… of a leopard's kill… of a hyena's kill… of a wolf's kill, had it cooked, and ate it. They became remorseful… "There is no offence, monks, in the case of what is possessed by an animal."

[141] Now at that time, when boiled rice was being distributed by the Saṅgha, a certain monk took a share groundlessly, saying, "Give the share for another." He became remorseful… "There is no offence entailing defeat, monk; there is an offence of expiation for deliberate lying." Now at that time, when solid food was being distributed by the Saṅgha… when cakes were being distributed by the Saṅgha… when sugarcane was being distributed by the Saṅgha… when timbarūsaka fruits were being distributed by the Saṅgha, a certain monk took a share groundlessly, saying, "Give the share for another." He became remorseful… "There is no offence entailing defeat, monk; there is an offence of expiation for deliberate lying."

[142] Now at that time, during a famine, a certain monk entered a cooked-rice shop and with intent to steal took away a bowlful of rice. He became remorseful… "Monk, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time, during a famine, a certain monk entered a butcher's shop and with intent to steal took away a bowlful of meat. He became remorseful… "Monk, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time, during a famine, a certain monk entered a cake shop and with intent to steal took away a bowlful of cakes… with intent to steal took away a bowlful of sweetmeats… with intent to steal took away a bowlful of sugar-balls. He became remorseful… "Monk, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat."

[143] Now at that time a certain monk, having seen a requisite by day, made a mental note: "I will steal it at night." Thinking it was that article he stole that article… thinking it was that article he stole another… thinking it was another he stole that article… thinking it was another he stole another. He became remorseful… "Monk, you have fallen into an offence entailing defeat." Now at that time a certain monk, having seen a requisite by day, made a mental note: "I will steal it at night." Thinking it was that article, he took away his own requisite. He became remorseful… "There is no offence entailing defeat, monk; there is an offence of wrong-doing."

----------------------------------------
Original (Pali, IAST):

[124] Pañcahi ākārehi adinnaṃ ādiyantassa āpatti dukkaṭassa. Parapariggahitañca hoti, parapariggahitasaññī ca, lahuko ca hoti parikkhāro, māsako vā ūnamāsako vā, theyyacittañca paccupaṭṭhitaṃ hoti. Āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa. Phandāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa. Ṭhānā cāveti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.

[125] Chahi ākārehi adinnaṃ ādiyantassa āpatti pārājikassa. Na ca sakasaññī, na ca vissāsaggāhī, na ca tāvakālikaṃ, garuko ca hoti parikkhāro, pañcamāsako vā atirekapañcamāsako vā, theyyacittañca paccupaṭṭhitaṃ hoti. Āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭasa. Phandāpeti, āpatti thullaccayassa. Ṭhānā cāveti, āpatti pārājikassa.

[126] Chahi ākārehi adinnaṃ ādiyantassa āpatti thullaccayassa. Na ca sakasaññī, na ca vissāsaggāhī, na ca tāvakālikaṃ, lahuko ca hoti parikkhāro atirekamāsako vā ūnapañcamāsako vā, theyyacittañca paccupaṭṭhitaṃ hoti. Āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa. Phandāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa. Ṭhānā cāveti, āpatti thullaccayassa.

[127] Chahi ākārehi adinnaṃ ādiyantassa āpatti dukkaṭassa. Na ca sakasaññī, na ca vissāsaggāhī, na ca tāvakālikaṃ, lahuko ca hoti parikkhāro, māsako vā ūnamāsako vā, theyyacittañca paccupaṭṭhitaṃ hoti. Āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa. Phandāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa. Ṭhānā cāveti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.

[128] Pañcahi ākārehi adinnaṃ ādiyantassa āpatti dukkaṭassa. Na ca parapariggahitaṃ hoti, parapariggahitasaññī ca, garuko ca hoti parikkhāro, pañcamāsako vā atirekapañcamāsako vā, theyyacittañca paccupaṭṭhitaṃ hoti. Āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa. Phandāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa. Ṭhānā cāveti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.

[129] Pañcahi ākārehi adinnaṃ ādiyantassa āpatti dukkaṭassa. Na ca parapariggahitaṃ hoti, parapariggahitasaññī ca, lahuko ca hoti parikkhāro, atirekamāsako vā ūnapañcamāsako vā, theyyacittañca paccupaṭṭhitaṃ hoti. Āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa. Phandāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa. Ṭhānā cāveti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.

[130] Pañcahi ākārehi adinnaṃ ādiyantassa āpatti dukkaṭassa. Na ca parapariggahitaṃ hoti, parapariggahitasaññī ca, lahuko ca hoti parikkhāro, māsako vā ūnamāsako vā, theyyacittañca paccupaṭṭhitaṃ hoti. Āmasati, āpatti dukkaṭassa. Phandāpeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa. Ṭhānā cāveti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.

[131] Anāpatti sasaññissa, vissāsaggāhe, tāvakālike, petapariggahe, tiracchānagatapariggahe, paṃsukūlasaññissa, ummattakassa, (khittacittassa vedanāṭṭassa) ādikammikassāti.

[132] Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū rajakattharaṇaṃ gantvā rajakabhaṇḍikaṃ avahariṃsu. Tesaṃ kukkuccaṃ ahosi – ‘‘bhagavatā sikkhāpadaṃ paññattaṃ. Kacci nu kho mayaṃ pārājikaṃ āpattiṃ āpannā’’ti. Bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocesuṃ. ‘‘Āpattiṃ tumhe, bhikkhave, āpannā pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu rajakattharaṇaṃ gantvā mahagghaṃ dussaṃ passitvā theyyacittaṃ uppādesi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi – ‘‘bhagavatā sikkhāpadaṃ paññattaṃ, kacci nu kho ahaṃ pārājikaṃ āpattiṃ āpanno’’ti? Bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocesi. ‘‘Anāpatti, bhikkhu, cittuppāde’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu rajakattharaṇaṃ gantvā mahagghaṃ dussaṃ passitvā theyyacitto āmasi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhu, pārājikassa. Āpatti dukkaṭassā’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu rajakattharaṇaṃ gantvā mahagghaṃ dussaṃ passitvā theyyacitto phandāpesi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhu, pārājikassa. Āpatti thullaccayassā’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu rajakattharaṇaṃ gantvā mahagghaṃ dussaṃ passitvā theyyacitto ṭhānā cāvesi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti.

[133] Tena kho pana samayena aññataro piṇḍacāriko bhikkhu mahagghaṃ uttarattharaṇaṃ passitvā theyyacittaṃ uppādesi…pe… theyyacitto āmasi…pe… theyyacitto phandāpesi…pe… theyyacitto ṭhānā cāvesi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti.

[134] Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu divā bhaṇḍaṃ passitvā nimittaṃ akāsi – ‘rattiṃ avaharissāmī’ti. So taṃ maññamāno taṃ avahari…pe… taṃ maññamāno aññaṃ avahari…pe… aññaṃ maññamāno taṃ avahari…pe… aññaṃ maññamāno aññaṃ avahari. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu divā bhaṇḍaṃ passitvā nimittaṃ akāsi – ‘‘rattiṃ avaharissāmī’’ti. So taṃ maññamāno attano bhaṇḍaṃ avahari. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhu, pārājikassa. Āpatti dukkaṭassā’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu aññassa bhaṇḍaṃ haranto sīse bhāraṃ theyyacitto āmasi…pe… theyyacitto phandāpesi…pe… theyyacitto khandhaṃ oropesi…pe… khandhe bhāraṃ theyyacitto āmasi…pe… theyyacitto phandāpesi…pe… theyyacitto kaṭiṃ oropesi…pe… kaṭiyā bhāraṃ theyyacitto āmasi…pe… theyyacitto phandāpesi…pe… theyyacitto hatthena aggahesi…pe… hatthe bhāraṃ theyyacitto bhūmiyaṃ nikkhipi…pe… theyyacitto bhūmito aggahesi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti.

[135] Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu ajjhokāse cīvaraṃ pattharitvā vihāraṃ pāvisi. Aññataro bhikkhu – ‘māyidaṃ cīvaraṃ nassī’ti, paṭisāmesi. So nikkhamitvā taṃ bhikkhuṃ pucchi – ‘‘āvuso, mayhaṃ cīvaraṃ kena avahaṭa’’nti? So evamāha – ‘‘mayā avahaṭa’’nti. ‘‘So taṃ ādiyi, assamaṇosi tva’’nti. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe…. Bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocesi. ‘‘Kiṃcitto tvaṃ, bhikkhū’’ti? ‘‘Niruttipatho ahaṃ, bhagavā’’ti. ‘‘Anāpatti, bhikkhu, niruttipathe’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu pīṭhe cīvaraṃ nikkhipitvā. Pīṭhe nisīdanaṃ nikkhipitvā… heṭṭhāpīṭhe pattaṃ nikkhipitvā vihāraṃ pāvisi. Aññataro bhikkhu – ‘‘māyaṃ patto nassī’’ti paṭisāmesi. So nikkhamitvā taṃ bhikkhuṃ pucchi – ‘‘āvuso, mayhaṃ patto kena avahaṭo’’ti? So evamāha – ‘‘mayā avahaṭo’’ti. ‘‘So taṃ ādiyi, assamaṇosi tva’’nti. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhu, niruttipathe’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena aññatarā bhikkhunī vatiyā cīvaraṃ pattharitvā vihāraṃ pāvisi. Aññatarā bhikkhunī – ‘māyidaṃ cīvaraṃ nassī’ti paṭisāmesi. Sā nikkhamitvā taṃ bhikkhuniṃ pucchi – ‘‘ayye, mayhaṃ cīvaraṃ kena avahaṭa’’nti? Sā evamāha – ‘‘mayā avahaṭa’’nti. ‘‘Sā taṃ ādiyi, assamaṇīsi tva’’nti. Tassā kukkuccaṃ ahosi. Atha kho sā bhikkhunī bhikkhunīnaṃ etamatthaṃ ārocesi. Bhikkhuniyo bhikkhūnaṃ etamatthaṃ ārocesuṃ. Bhikkhū bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocesuṃ…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhave, niruttipathe’’ti.

[136] Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu vātamaṇḍalikāya ukkhittaṃ sāṭakaṃ passitvā sāmikānaṃ dassāmīti, aggahesi. Sāmikā taṃ bhikkhuṃ codesuṃ – ‘‘assamaṇosi tva’’nti. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘kiṃcitto tvaṃ bhikkhū’’ti? ‘‘Atheyyacitto ahaṃ, bhagavā’’ti. Anāpatti, bhikkhu, atheyyacittassā’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu vātamaṇḍalikāya ukkhittaṃ veṭhanaṃ passitvā ‘pure sāmikā passantī’ti theyyacitto aggahesi. Sāmikā taṃ bhikkhuṃ codesuṃ – ‘‘assamaṇosi tva’’nti. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti.

[137] Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu susānaṃ gantvā abhinne sarīre paṃsukūlaṃ aggahesi. Tasmiñca sarīre peto adhivattho hoti. Atha kho so peto taṃ bhikkhuṃ etadavoca – ‘‘mā, bhante, mayhaṃ sāṭakaṃ aggahesī’’ti. So bhikkhu anādiyanto agamāsi. Atha kho taṃ sarīraṃ uṭṭhahitvā tassa bhikkhuno piṭṭhito piṭṭhito anubandhi. Atha kho so bhikkhu vihāraṃ pavisitvā dvāraṃ thakesi. Atha kho taṃ sarīraṃ tattheva paripati. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhu, pārājikassa. Na ca, bhikkhave, abhinne sarīre paṃsukūlaṃ gahetabbaṃ. So gaṇheyya, āpatti dukkaṭassā’’ti.

[138] Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu saṅghassa cīvare bhājīyamāne theyyacitto kusaṃ saṅkāmetvā cīvaraṃ aggahesi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti.

[139] Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā ānando jantāghare aññatarassa bhikkhuno antaravāsakaṃ attano maññamāno nivāsesi. Atha kho so bhikkhu āyasmantaṃ ānandaṃ etadavoca – ‘‘kissa me tvaṃ, āvuso ānanda, antaravāsakaṃ nivāsesī’’ti? ‘‘Sakasaññī ahaṃ, āvuso’’ti. Bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocesuṃ. ‘‘Anāpatti, bhikkhave, sakasaññissā’’ti.

[140] Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā bhikkhū gijjhakūṭā pabbatā orohantā sīhavighāsaṃ passitvā pacāpetvā paribhuñjiṃsu. Tesaṃ kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhave, sīhavighāse’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā bhikkhū gijjhakūṭā pabbatā orohantā byagghavighāsaṃ passitvā… dīpivighāsaṃ passitvā… taracchavighāsaṃ passitvā… kokavighāsaṃ passitvā pacāpetvā paribhuñjiṃsu. Tesaṃ kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhave, tiracchānagatapariggahe’’ti.

[141] Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu saṅghassa odane bhājīyamāne – ‘aparassa bhāgaṃ dehī’ti amūlakaṃ aggahesi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhu, pārājikassa. Āpatti sampajānamusāvāde pācittiyassā’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu saṅghassa khādanīye bhājiyamāne… saṅghassa pūve bhājiyamāne… saṅghassa ucchumhi bhājiyamāne… saṅghassa timbarūsake bhājiyamāne – ‘aparassa bhāgaṃ dehī’ti amūlakaṃ aggahesi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe…. ‘‘Anāpatti, bhikkhu, pārājikassa. Āpatti sampajānamusāvāde pācittiyassā’’ti.

[142] Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu dubbhikkhe odanīyagharaṃ pavisitvā pattapūraṃ odanaṃ theyyacitto avahari. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu dubbhikkhe sūnagharaṃ pavisitvā pattapūraṃ maṃsaṃ theyyacitto avahari. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu dubbhikkhe pūvagharaṃ pavisitvā pattapūraṃ pūvaṃ theyyacitto avahari…pe… pattapūrā sakkhaliyo theyyacitto avahari…pe… pattapūre modake theyyacitto avahari. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti.

[143] Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu divā parikkhāraṃ passitvā nimittaṃ akāsi – ‘‘rattiṃ avaharissāmī’’ti. So taṃ maññamāno taṃ avahari…pe… taṃ maññamāno aññaṃ avahari…pe… aññaṃ maññamāno taṃ avahari…pe… aññaṃ maññamāno aññaṃ avahari. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu divā parikkhāraṃ passitvā nimittaṃ akāsi – ‘‘rattiṃ avaharissāmī’’ti. So taṃ maññamāno attano parikkhāraṃ avahari. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhu, pārājikassa. Āpatti dukkaṭassā’’ti.
