Pārājikapāḷi — 1. Pārājikakaṇḍaṃ
vin01m.mul.xml, verses 60-66

[60] Monks who are his enemies bring a human male… a non-human male… a male animal into a monk's presence and make him sit down upon his genital organ with the anus… with the mouth. If he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its remaining there, consents to its withdrawal, there is an offence entailing defeat…and so on… If he does not consent, there is no offence. Monks who are his enemies bring a male animal that is awake… asleep… drunk… insane… heedless… dead and not devoured… dead and mostly not devoured…and so on… there is an offence entailing defeat. They bring one that is dead and mostly devoured into the monk's presence and make it sit down upon his genital organ with the anus… with the mouth. If he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its remaining there, consents to its withdrawal, there is a grave offence…and so on… If he does not consent, there is no offence.

[61] Monks who are his enemies bring a human woman into a monk's presence and make her sit down upon his genital organ with the anus… with the vagina… with the mouth: she being covered and he uncovered, she uncovered and he covered, she covered and he covered, she uncovered and he uncovered. If he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its remaining there, consents to its withdrawal, there is an offence entailing defeat…and so on… If he does not consent, there is no offence. Monks who are his enemies bring a human woman who is awake… asleep… drunk… insane… heedless… dead and not devoured… dead and mostly not devoured…and so on… there is an offence entailing defeat. They bring one dead and mostly devoured into the monk's presence and make her sit down upon his genital organ with the anus… with the vagina… with the mouth: she being covered and he uncovered, she uncovered and he covered, she covered and he covered, she uncovered and he uncovered. If he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its remaining there, consents to its withdrawal, there is a grave offence…and so on… If he does not consent, there is no offence. Monks who are his enemies bring a non-human woman… a female animal… a human hermaphrodite… a non-human hermaphrodite… an animal hermaphrodite into a monk's presence and make it sit down upon his genital organ with the anus… with the vagina… with the mouth: the one covered and the other uncovered, the one uncovered and the other covered, both covered, both uncovered. If he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its remaining there, consents to its withdrawal, there is an offence entailing defeat…and so on… If he does not consent, there is no offence. Monks who are his enemies bring an animal hermaphrodite that is awake… asleep… drunk… insane… heedless… dead and not devoured… dead and mostly not devoured…and so on… there is an offence entailing defeat. They bring one dead and mostly devoured into the monk's presence and make it sit down upon his genital organ with the anus… with the vagina… with the mouth: the one covered and the other uncovered, the one uncovered and the other covered, both covered, both uncovered. If he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its remaining there, consents to its withdrawal, there is a grave offence…and so on… If he does not consent, there is no offence.

[62] Monks who are his enemies bring a human paṇḍaka… a non-human paṇḍaka… an animal paṇḍaka… a human male… a non-human male… a male animal into a monk's presence and make him sit down upon his genital organ with the anus… with the mouth: the one covered and the other uncovered, the one uncovered and the other covered, both covered, both uncovered. If he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its remaining there, consents to its withdrawal, there is an offence entailing defeat…and so on… If he does not consent, there is no offence. Monks who are his enemies bring a male animal that is awake… asleep… drunk… insane… heedless… dead and not devoured… dead and mostly not devoured…and so on… there is an offence entailing defeat. They bring one dead and mostly devoured into the monk's presence and make it sit down upon his genital organ with the anus… with the mouth: the one covered and the other uncovered, the one uncovered and the other covered, both covered, both uncovered. If he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its remaining there, consents to its withdrawal, there is a grave offence…and so on… If he does not consent, there is no offence.

[63] Monks who are his enemies bring a monk into the presence of a human woman and make him sit down with his genital organ upon her anus… her vagina… her mouth. If he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its remaining there, consents to its withdrawal, there is an offence entailing defeat…and so on… If he does not consent, there is no offence. Monks who are his enemies bring a monk into the presence of a human woman who is awake… asleep… drunk… insane… heedless… dead and not devoured… dead and mostly not devoured…and so on… there is an offence entailing defeat. They bring him into the presence of one dead and mostly devoured and make him sit down with his genital organ upon her anus… her vagina… her mouth. If he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its remaining there, consents to its withdrawal, there is a grave offence…and so on… If he does not consent, there is no offence. Monks who are his enemies bring a monk into the presence of a non-human woman… a female animal… a human hermaphrodite… a non-human hermaphrodite… an animal hermaphrodite… a human paṇḍaka… a non-human paṇḍaka… an animal paṇḍaka… a human male… a non-human male… a male animal, and make him sit down with his genital organ upon the anus… the mouth. If he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its remaining there, consents to its withdrawal, there is an offence entailing defeat…and so on… If he does not consent, there is no offence. Monks who are his enemies bring a monk into the presence of a male animal that is awake… asleep… drunk… insane… heedless… dead and not devoured… dead and mostly not devoured…and so on… there is an offence entailing defeat. They bring him into the presence of one dead and mostly devoured and make him sit down with his genital organ upon the anus… the mouth. If he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its remaining there, consents to its withdrawal, there is a grave offence…and so on… If he does not consent, there is no offence.

[64] Monks who are his enemies bring a monk into the presence of a human woman and make him sit down with his genital organ upon her anus… her vagina… her mouth: he being covered and she uncovered, he uncovered and she covered, he covered and she covered, he uncovered and she uncovered. If he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its remaining there, consents to its withdrawal, there is an offence entailing defeat…and so on… If he does not consent, there is no offence. Monks who are his enemies bring a monk into the presence of a human woman who is awake… asleep… drunk… insane… heedless… dead and not devoured… dead and mostly not devoured…and so on… there is an offence entailing defeat. They bring him into the presence of one dead and mostly devoured and make him sit down with his genital organ upon her anus… her vagina… her mouth: he being covered and she uncovered, he uncovered and she covered, he covered and she covered, he uncovered and she uncovered. If he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its remaining there, consents to its withdrawal, there is a grave offence…and so on… If he does not consent, there is no offence. Monks who are his enemies bring a monk into the presence of a non-human woman… a female animal… a human hermaphrodite… a non-human hermaphrodite… an animal hermaphrodite… a human paṇḍaka… a non-human paṇḍaka… an animal paṇḍaka… a human male… a non-human male… a male animal, and make him sit down with his genital organ upon the anus… the mouth: the one covered and the other uncovered, the one uncovered and the other covered, both covered, both uncovered. If he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its remaining there, consents to its withdrawal, there is an offence entailing defeat…and so on… If he does not consent, there is no offence.

[65] Monks who are his enemies bring a monk into the presence of a male animal that is awake… asleep… drunk… insane… heedless… dead and not devoured… dead and mostly not devoured…and so on… there is an offence entailing defeat. They bring him into the presence of one dead and mostly devoured and make him sit down with his genital organ upon the anus… the mouth: the one covered and the other uncovered, the one uncovered and the other covered, both covered, both uncovered. If he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its remaining there, consents to its withdrawal, there is a grave offence…and so on… If he does not consent, there is no offence. Just as the case of monks who are his enemies has been set out in full, so should the rest be set out in full: kings who are his enemies… thieves who are his enemies… rogues who are his enemies… "lotus-scented ones" who are his enemies. This is given in abbreviated form.

[66] If he inserts an orifice into an orifice, there is an offence entailing defeat. If he inserts an orifice into what is not an orifice, there is an offence entailing defeat. If he inserts what is not an orifice into an orifice, there is an offence entailing defeat. If he inserts what is not an orifice into what is not an orifice, there is a grave offence. A monk transgresses with a sleeping monk: if, on waking, the latter consents, both are to be expelled; if, on waking, he does not consent, only the defiler is to be expelled. A monk transgresses with a sleeping novice: if, on waking, the latter consents, both are to be expelled; if, on waking, he does not consent, only the defiler is to be expelled. A novice transgresses with a sleeping monk: if, on waking, the latter consents, both are to be expelled; if, on waking, he does not consent, only the defiler is to be expelled. A novice transgresses with a sleeping novice: if, on waking, the latter consents, both are to be expelled; if, on waking, he does not consent, only the defiler is to be expelled. There is no offence for one who does not know, for one who does not consent, for one who is mad, for one who is deranged in mind, for one overwhelmed by pain, and for the first offender.

----------------------------------------
Traditional Chinese:

[60] 諸比丘怨敵者，將人男…非人男…畜生男帶到比丘處，以〔其〕大便道…以〔其〕口，令〔比丘之〕男根坐入。若彼領受入、領受已入、領受停住、領受拔出者，犯波羅夷…乃至…若不領受者，無罪。諸比丘怨敵者，將醒著之畜生男…睡眠者…醉者…狂者…放逸者…死而未被〔獸〕食者…死而大部分未被食者…乃至…犯波羅夷。將死而大部分已被食者帶到比丘處，以〔其〕大便道…以〔其〕口，令〔比丘之〕男根坐入。若彼領受入、領受已入、領受停住、領受拔出者，犯偷蘭遮…乃至…若不領受者，無罪。

[61] 諸比丘怨敵者，將人女帶到比丘處，以〔其〕大便道…小便道…口，令〔比丘之〕男根坐入：她有覆而他無覆，她無覆而他有覆，她有覆而他亦有覆，她無覆而他亦無覆。若彼領受入、領受已入、領受停住、領受拔出者，犯波羅夷…乃至…若不領受者，無罪。諸比丘怨敵者，將醒著之人女…睡眠者…醉者…狂者…放逸者…死而未被食者…死而大部分未被食者…乃至…犯波羅夷。將死而大部分已被食者帶到比丘處，以〔其〕大便道…小便道…口，令〔比丘之〕男根坐入：她有覆而他無覆，她無覆而他有覆，她有覆而他亦有覆，她無覆而他亦無覆。若彼領受入、領受已入、領受停住、領受拔出者，犯偷蘭遮…乃至…若不領受者，無罪。諸比丘怨敵者，將非人女…畜生女…人二形者…非人二形者…畜生二形者帶到比丘處，以〔其〕大便道…小便道…口，令〔比丘之〕男根坐入：彼有覆而此無覆，彼無覆而此有覆，彼有覆而此亦有覆，彼無覆而此亦無覆。若彼領受入、領受已入、領受停住、領受拔出者，犯波羅夷…乃至…若不領受者，無罪。諸比丘怨敵者，將醒著之畜生二形者…睡眠者…醉者…狂者…放逸者…死而未被食者…死而大部分未被食者…乃至…犯波羅夷。將死而大部分已被食者帶到比丘處，以〔其〕大便道…小便道…口，令〔比丘之〕男根坐入：彼有覆而此無覆，彼無覆而此有覆，彼有覆而此亦有覆，彼無覆而此亦無覆。若彼領受入、領受已入、領受停住、領受拔出者，犯偷蘭遮…乃至…若不領受者，無罪。

[62] 諸比丘怨敵者，將人黃門…非人黃門…畜生黃門…人男…非人男…畜生男帶到比丘處，以〔其〕大便道…口，令〔比丘之〕男根坐入：彼有覆而此無覆，彼無覆而此有覆，彼有覆而此亦有覆，彼無覆而此亦無覆。若彼領受入、領受已入、領受停住、領受拔出者，犯波羅夷…乃至…若不領受者，無罪。諸比丘怨敵者，將醒著之畜生男…睡眠者…醉者…狂者…放逸者…死而未被食者…死而大部分未被食者…乃至…犯波羅夷。將死而大部分已被食者帶到比丘處，以〔其〕大便道…口，令〔比丘之〕男根坐入：彼有覆而此無覆，彼無覆而此有覆，彼有覆而此亦有覆，彼無覆而此亦無覆。若彼領受入、領受已入、領受停住、領受拔出者，犯偷蘭遮…乃至…若不領受者，無罪。

[63] 諸比丘怨敵者，將比丘帶到人女處，令〔比丘之〕男根坐入〔其〕大便道…小便道…口。若彼領受入、領受已入、領受停住、領受拔出者，犯波羅夷…乃至…若不領受者，無罪。諸比丘怨敵者，將比丘帶到醒著之人女處…睡眠者…醉者…狂者…放逸者…死而未被食者…死而大部分未被食者…乃至…犯波羅夷。帶到死而大部分已被食者處，令〔比丘之〕男根坐入〔其〕大便道…小便道…口。若彼領受入、領受已入、領受停住、領受拔出者，犯偷蘭遮…乃至…若不領受者，無罪。諸比丘怨敵者，將比丘帶到非人女…畜生女…人二形者…非人二形者…畜生二形者…人黃門…非人黃門…畜生黃門…人男…非人男…畜生男處，令〔比丘之〕男根坐入〔其〕大便道…口。若彼領受入、領受已入、領受停住、領受拔出者，犯波羅夷…乃至…若不領受者，無罪。諸比丘怨敵者，將比丘帶到醒著之畜生男處…睡眠者…醉者…狂者…放逸者…死而未被食者…死而大部分未被食者…乃至…犯波羅夷。帶到死而大部分已被食者處，令〔比丘之〕男根坐入〔其〕大便道…口。若彼領受入、領受已入、領受停住、領受拔出者，犯偷蘭遮…乃至…若不領受者，無罪。

[64] 諸比丘怨敵者，將比丘帶到人女處，令〔比丘之〕男根坐入〔其〕大便道…小便道…口：他有覆而她無覆，他無覆而她有覆，他有覆而她亦有覆，他無覆而她亦無覆。若彼領受入、領受已入、領受停住、領受拔出者，犯波羅夷…乃至…若不領受者，無罪。諸比丘怨敵者，將比丘帶到醒著之人女處…睡眠者…醉者…狂者…放逸者…死而未被食者…死而大部分未被食者…乃至…犯波羅夷。帶到死而大部分已被食者處，令〔比丘之〕男根坐入〔其〕大便道…小便道…口：他有覆而她無覆，他無覆而她有覆，他有覆而她亦有覆，他無覆而她亦無覆。若彼領受入、領受已入、領受停住、領受拔出者，犯偷蘭遮…乃至…若不領受者，無罪。諸比丘怨敵者，將比丘帶到非人女…畜生女…人二形者…非人二形者…畜生二形者…人黃門…非人黃門…畜生黃門…人男…非人男…畜生男處，令〔比丘之〕男根坐入〔其〕大便道…口：此有覆而彼無覆，此無覆而彼有覆，此有覆而彼亦有覆，此無覆而彼亦無覆。若彼領受入、領受已入、領受停住、領受拔出者，犯波羅夷…乃至…若不領受者，無罪。

[65] 諸比丘怨敵者，將比丘帶到醒著之畜生男處…睡眠者…醉者…狂者…放逸者…死而未被食者…死而大部分未被食者…乃至…犯波羅夷。帶到死而大部分已被食者處，令〔比丘之〕男根坐入〔其〕大便道…口：此有覆而彼無覆，此無覆而彼有覆，此有覆而彼亦有覆，此無覆而彼亦無覆。若彼領受入、領受已入、領受停住、領受拔出者，犯偷蘭遮…乃至…若不領受者，無罪。如比丘怨敵者已廣說，亦應如是廣說：王怨敵者…賊怨敵者…惡漢怨敵者…青蓮香怨敵者。（此處略說。）

[66] 以〔自己之〕道入〔他之〕道者，犯波羅夷。以道入非道者，犯波羅夷。以非道入道者，犯波羅夷。以非道入非道者，犯偷蘭遮。比丘於睡眠之比丘行不淨行；若醒後領受者，二人俱應滅擯。醒後不領受者，唯行污者應滅擯。比丘於睡眠之沙彌行不淨行；若醒後領受者，二人俱應滅擯。醒後不領受者，唯行污者應滅擯。沙彌於睡眠之比丘行不淨行；若醒後領受者，二人俱應滅擯。醒後不領受者，唯行污者應滅擯。沙彌於睡眠之沙彌行不淨行；若醒後領受者，二人俱應滅擯。醒後不領受者，唯行污者應滅擯。不知者、不領受者、狂者、心亂者、苦痛所惱者、最初犯者，無罪。

----------------------------------------
Original (Pali, IAST):

[60] Bhikkhupaccatthikā manussapurisaṃ… amanussapurisaṃ… tiracchānagatapurisaṃ bhikkhussa santike ānetvā vaccamaggena… mukhena aṅgajātaṃ abhinisīdenti. So ce pavesanaṃ sādiyati, paviṭṭhaṃ sādiyati, ṭhitaṃ sādiyati, uddharaṇaṃ sādiyati, āpatti pārājikassa…pe… na sādiyati, anāpatti. Bhikkhupaccatthikā tiracchānagatapurisaṃ jāgarantaṃ… suttaṃ… mattaṃ… ummattaṃ… pamattaṃ… mataṃ akkhāyitaṃ… mataṃ yebhuyyena akkhāyitaṃ…pe… āpatti pārājikassa. Mataṃ yebhuyyena khāyitaṃ bhikkhussa santike ānetvā vaccamaggena… mukhena aṅgajātaṃ abhinisīdenti. So ce pavesanaṃ sādiyati, paviṭṭhaṃ sādiyati, ṭhitaṃ sādiyati, uddharaṇaṃ sādiyati, āpatti thullaccayassa…pe… na sādiyati, anāpatti.

[61] Bhikkhupaccatthikā manussitthiṃ bhikkhussa santike ānetvā vaccamaggena… passāvamaggena… mukhena aṅgajātaṃ abhinisīdenti santhatāya asanthatassa, asanthatāya santhatassa, santhatāya santhatassa, asanthatāya asanthatassa. So ce pavesanaṃ sādiyati, paviṭṭhaṃ sādiyati, ṭhitaṃ sādiyati, uddharaṇaṃ sādiyati, āpatti pārājikassa…pe… na sādiyati, anāpatti. Bhikkhupaccatthikā manussitthiṃ jāgarantiṃ… suttaṃ… mattaṃ… ummattaṃ… pamattaṃ… mataṃ akkhāyitaṃ… mataṃ yebhuyyena akkhāyitaṃ…pe… āpatti pārājikassa. Mataṃ yebhuyyena khāyitaṃ bhikkhussa santike ānetvā vaccamaggena… passāvamaggena… mukhena aṅgajātaṃ abhinisīdenti, santhatāya asanthatassa, asanthatāya santhatassa, santhatāya santhatassa, asanthatāya asanthatassa. So ce pavesanaṃ sādiyati, paviṭṭhaṃ sādiyati, ṭhitaṃ sādiyati, uddharaṇaṃ sādiyati, āpatti thullaccayassa…pe… na sādiyati, anāpatti. Bhikkhupaccatthikā amanussitthiṃ… tiracchānagatitthiṃ… manussubhatobyañjanakaṃ… amanassubhatobyañjanakaṃ … tiracchānagatubhatobyañjanakaṃ bhikkhussa santike ānetvā vaccamaggena… passāvamaggena… mukhena aṅgajātaṃ abhinisīdenti santhatassa asanthatassa, asanthatassa santhatassa, santhatassa santhatassa, asanthatassa asanthatassa. So ce pavesanaṃ sādiyati, paviṭṭhaṃ sādiyati, ṭhitaṃ sādiyati, uddharaṇaṃ sādiyati, āpatti pārājikassa…pe… na sādiyati, anāpatti. Bhikkhupaccatthikā tiracchānagatubhatobyañjanakaṃ jāgarantaṃ… suttaṃ… mattaṃ… ummattaṃ… pamattaṃ… mataṃ akkhāyitaṃ… mataṃ yebhuyyena akkhāyitaṃ…pe… āpatti pārājikassa. Mataṃ yebhuyyena khāyitaṃ bhikkhussa santike ānetvā vaccamaggena… passāvamaggena… mukhena aṅgajātaṃ abhinisīdenti, santhatassa asanthatassa, asanthatassa santhatassa, santhatassa santhatassa, asanthatassa asanthatassa. So ce pavesanaṃ sādiyati, paviṭṭhaṃ sādiyati, ṭhitaṃ sādiyati, uddharaṇaṃ sādiyati, āpatti thullaccayassa…pe… na sādiyati, anāpatti.

[62] Bhikkhupaccatthikā manussapaṇḍakaṃ… amanussapaṇḍakaṃ… tiracchānagatapaṇḍakaṃ… manussapurisaṃ… amanussapurisaṃ… tiracchānagatapurisaṃ bhikkhussa santike ānetvā vaccamaggena… mukhena aṅgajātaṃ abhinisīdenti santhatassa asanthatassa, asanthatassa santhatassa, santhatassa santhatassa, asanthatassa asanthatassa. So ce pavesanaṃ sādiyati, paviṭṭhaṃ sādiyati, ṭhitaṃ sādiyati, uddharaṇaṃ sādiyati, āpatti pārājikassa…pe… na sādiyati, anāpatti. Bhikkhupaccatthikā tiracchānagatapurisaṃ jāgarantaṃ… suttaṃ… mattaṃ… ummattaṃ… pamattaṃ… mataṃ akkhāyitaṃ… mataṃ yebhuyyena akkhāyitaṃ…pe… āpatti pārājikassa. Mataṃ yebhuyyena khāyitaṃ bhikkhussa santike ānetvā vaccamaggena… mukhena aṅgajātaṃ abhinisīdenti, santhatassa asanthatassa, asanthatassa santhatassa, santhatassa santhatassa, asanthatassa asanthatassa. So ca pavesanaṃ sādiyati, paviṭṭhaṃ sādiyati, ṭhitaṃ sādiyati, uddharaṇaṃ sādiyati, āpatti thullaccayassa…pe… na sādiyati, anāpatti.

[63] Bhikkhupaccatthikā bhikkhuṃ manussitthiyā santike ānetvā aṅgajātena vaccamaggaṃ… passāvamaggaṃ… mukhaṃ abhinisīdenti. So ce pavesanaṃ sādiyati, paviṭṭhaṃ sādiyati, ṭhitaṃ sādiyati, uddharaṇaṃ sādiyati, āpatti pārājikassa…pe… na sādiyati, anāpatti. Bhikkhupaccatthikā bhikkhuṃ manussitthiyā jāgarantiyā… suttāya… mattāya… ummattāya… pamattāya … matāya akkhāyitāya… matāya yebhuyyena akkhāyitāya…pe… āpatti pārājikassa. Matāya yebhuyyena khāyitāya santike ānetvā aṅgajātena vaccamaggaṃ… passāvamaggaṃ… mukhaṃ abhinisīdenti. So ce pavesanaṃ sādiyati, paviṭṭhaṃ sādiyati, ṭhitaṃ sādiyati, uddharaṇaṃ sādiyati, āpatti thullaccayassa…pe… na sādiyati, anāpatti. Bhikkhupaccatthikā bhikkhuṃ amanussitthiyā… tiracchānagatitthiyā… manussubhatobyañjanakassa… amanussubhatobyañjanakassa… tiracchānagatubhatobyañjanakassa… manussapaṇḍakassa… amanussapaṇḍakassa… tiracchānagatapaṇḍakassa… manussapurisassa… amanussapurisassa… tiracchānagatapurisassa santike ānetvā aṅgajātena vaccamaggaṃ… mukhaṃ abhinisīdenti. So ce pavesanaṃ sādiyati, paviṭṭhaṃ sādiyati, ṭhitaṃ sādiyati, uddharaṇaṃ sādiyati, āpatti pārājikassa…pe… na sādiyati, anāpatti. Bhikkhupaccatthikā bhikkhuṃ tiracchānagatapurisassa jāgarantassa… suttassa… mattassa… ummattassa… pamattassa… matassa akkhāyitassa… matassa yebhuyyena akkhāyitassa…pe… āpatti pārājikassa. Matassa yebhuyyena khāyitassa santike ānetvā aṅgajātena vaccamaggaṃ… mukhaṃ abhinisīdenti. So ce pavesanaṃ sādiyati, paviṭṭhaṃ sādiyati, ṭhitaṃ sādiyati, uddharaṇaṃ sādiyati, āpatti thullaccayassa…pe… na sādiyati, anāpatti.

[64] Bhikkhupaccatthikā bhikkhuṃ manussitthiyā santike ānetvā aṅgajātena vaccamaggaṃ… passāvamaggaṃ… mukhaṃ abhinisīdenti santhatassa asanthatāya, asanthatassa santhatāya, santhatassa santhatāya, asanthatassa asanthatāya. So ce pavesanaṃ sādiyati, paviṭṭhaṃ sādiyati, ṭhitaṃ sādiyati, uddharaṇaṃ sādiyati, āpatti pārājikassa…pe… na sādiyati, anāpatti. Bhikkhupaccatthikā bhikkhuṃ manussitthiyā jāgarantiyā… suttāya… mattāya… ummattāya… pamattāya… matāya akkhāyitāya… matāya yebhuyyena akkhāyitāya…pe… āpatti pārājikassa. Matāya yebhuyyena khāyitāya santike ānetvā aṅgajātena vaccamaggaṃ… passāvamaggaṃ… mukhaṃ abhinisīdenti santhatassa asanthatāya, asanthatassa santhatāya, santhatassa santhatāya, asanthatassa asanthatāya. So ce pavesanaṃ sādiyati, paviṭṭhaṃ sādiyati, ṭhitaṃ sādiyati, uddharaṇaṃ sādiyati, āpatti thullaccayassa…pe… na sādiyati, anāpatti. Bhikkhupaccatthikā bhikkhuṃ amanussitthiyā… tiracchānagatitthiyā… manussubhatobyañjanakassa… amanussubhatobyañjanakassa… tiracchānagatubhatobyañjanakassa… manussapaṇḍakassa… amanussapaṇḍakassa… tiracchānagatapaṇḍakassa… manussapurisassa… amanussapurisassa… tiracchānagatapurisassa santike ānetvā aṅgajātena vaccamaggaṃ… mukhaṃ abhinisīdenti santhatassa asanthatassa, asanthatassa santhatassa, santhatassa santhatassa, asanthatassa asanthatassa. So ce pavesanaṃ sādiyati, paviṭṭhaṃ sādiyati, ṭhitaṃ sādiyati, uddharaṇaṃ sādiyati, āpatti pārājikassa…pe… na sādiyati, anāpatti.

[65] Bhikkhupaccatthikā bhikkhuṃ tiracchānagatapurisassa jāgarantassa… suttassa… mattassa… ummattassa… pamattassa… matassa akkhāyitassa… matassa yebhuyyena akkhāyitassa…pe… āpatti pārājikassa. Matassa yebhuyyena khāyitassa santike ānetvā aṅgajātena vaccamaggaṃ… mukhaṃ abhinisīdenti santhatassa asanthatassa, asanthatassa santhatassa, santhatassa santhatassa, asanthatassa asanthatassa. So ce pavesanaṃ sādiyati, paviṭṭhaṃ sādiyati, ṭhitaṃ sādiyati, uddharaṇaṃ sādiyati, āpatti thullaccayassa…pe… na sādiyati, anāpatti. Yathā bhikkhupaccatthikā vitthāritā, evaṃ vitthāretabbā. Rājapaccatthikā… corapaccatthikā… dhuttapaccatthikā… uppaḷagandhapaccatthikā. Saṃkhittaṃ.

[66] Maggena maggaṃ paveseti, āpatti pārājikassa. Maggena amaggaṃ paveseti, āpatti pārājikassa. Amaggena maggaṃ paveseti, āpatti pārājikassa. Amaggena amaggaṃ paveseti, āpatti thullaccayassa. Bhikkhu suttabhikkhumhi vippaṭipajjati; paṭibuddho sādiyati, ubho nāsetabbā. Paṭibuddho na sādiyati, dūsako nāsetabbo. Bhikkhu suttasāmaṇeramhi vippaṭipajjati; paṭibuddho sādiyati, ubho nāsetabbā. Paṭibuddho na sādiyati, dūsako nāsetabbo. Sāmaṇero suttabhikkhumhi vippaṭipajjati; paṭibuddho sādiyati, ubho nāsetabbā. Paṭibuddho na sādiyati, dūsako nāsetabbo. Sāmaṇero suttasāmaṇeramhi vippaṭipajjati; paṭibuddho sādiyati, ubho nāsetabbā. Paṭibuddho na sādiyati, dūsako nāsetabbo. Anāpatti ajānantassa, asādiyantassa, ummattakassa, khittacittassa, vedanāṭṭassa, ādikammikassāti.
