Pārājikapāḷi — 1. Pārājikakaṇḍaṃ
vin01m.mul.xml, verses 64-83

[64] Enemies of a bhikkhu, having brought the bhikkhu into the presence of a human female, make him sit down upon her with his male organ in the anus… in the vagina… in the mouth: he being covered and she uncovered, he uncovered and she covered, he covered and she covered, he uncovered and she uncovered. If he consents to the entering, consents to the having entered, consents to the remaining, consents to the withdrawing, there is an offence entailing expulsion… and so on… If he does not consent, there is no offence. Enemies of a bhikkhu, having brought the bhikkhu into the presence of a human female who is awake… who is asleep… who is drunk… who is insane… who is heedless… who is dead but not decomposed… who is dead but for the most part not decomposed… and so on… there is an offence entailing expulsion. Having brought him into the presence of one who is dead and for the most part decomposed, they make him sit down upon her with his male organ in the anus… in the vagina… in the mouth: he covered and she uncovered, he uncovered and she covered, he covered and she covered, he uncovered and she uncovered. If he consents to the entering, consents to the having entered, consents to the remaining, consents to the withdrawing, there is a grave offence… and so on… If he does not consent, there is no offence. Enemies of a bhikkhu, having brought the bhikkhu into the presence of a non-human female… of a female animal… of a human hermaphrodite… of a non-human hermaphrodite… of an animal hermaphrodite… of a human eunuch… of a non-human eunuch… of an animal eunuch… of a human male… of a non-human male… of an animal male, make him sit down upon them with his male organ in the anus… in the mouth: he covered and the other uncovered, he uncovered and the other covered, he covered and the other covered, he uncovered and the other uncovered. If he consents to the entering, consents to the having entered, consents to the remaining, consents to the withdrawing, there is an offence entailing expulsion… and so on… If he does not consent, there is no offence.

[65] Enemies of a bhikkhu, having brought the bhikkhu into the presence of a male animal that is awake… asleep… drunk… insane… heedless… dead but not decomposed… dead but for the most part not decomposed… and so on… there is an offence entailing expulsion. Having brought him into the presence of one that is dead and for the most part decomposed, they make him sit down upon it with his male organ in the anus… in the mouth: he covered and it uncovered, he uncovered and it covered, he covered and it covered, he uncovered and it uncovered. If he consents to the entering, consents to the having entered, consents to the remaining, consents to the withdrawing, there is a grave offence… and so on… If he does not consent, there is no offence. Just as the case of "enemies of a bhikkhu" has been set out in detail, so should the rest be set out in detail: enemies who are kings… enemies who are thieves… enemies who are rogues… enemies who are "lotus-scent" rogues. This is stated in brief.

[66] If he inserts an organ into an orifice, there is an offence entailing expulsion. If he inserts an organ into a non-orifice, there is an offence entailing expulsion. If he inserts a non-organ into an orifice, there is an offence entailing expulsion. If he inserts a non-organ into a non-orifice, there is a grave offence. A bhikkhu commits misconduct with a sleeping bhikkhu: if, when awakened, he consents, both are to be expelled; if, when awakened, he does not consent, only the violator is to be expelled. A bhikkhu commits misconduct with a sleeping novice: if, when awakened, he consents, both are to be expelled; if, when awakened, he does not consent, only the violator is to be expelled. A novice commits misconduct with a sleeping bhikkhu: if, when awakened, he consents, both are to be expelled; if, when awakened, he does not consent, only the violator is to be expelled. A novice commits misconduct with a sleeping novice: if, when awakened, he consents, both are to be expelled; if, when awakened, he does not consent, only the violator is to be expelled. There is no offence for one who does not know, for one who does not consent, for one who is insane, for one who is deranged in mind, for one overwhelmed by pain, and for the first offender.

[67] At that time a certain bhikkhu engaged in sexual intercourse with a female monkey. He became remorseful: "A training rule has been laid down by the Blessed One — could it be that I have fallen into an offence entailing expulsion?" He reported the matter to the Blessed One. "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing expulsion." At that time a number of Vajjiputtaka bhikkhus of Vesālī engaged in sexual intercourse without having renounced the training and without having declared their weakness. They became remorseful: "A training rule has been laid down by the Blessed One — could it be that we have fallen into an offence entailing expulsion?" They reported the matter to the Blessed One. "Bhikkhus, you have fallen into an offence entailing expulsion." At that time a certain bhikkhu, thinking, "In this way there will be no offence for me," engaged in sexual intercourse in the guise of a layman. He became remorseful: "A training rule has been laid down by the Blessed One — could it be that I have fallen into an offence entailing expulsion?" He reported the matter to the Blessed One. "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing expulsion." At that time a certain bhikkhu, thinking, "In this way there will be no offence for me," became naked and engaged in sexual intercourse. He became remorseful… and so on… "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing expulsion." At that time a certain bhikkhu, thinking, "In this way there will be no offence for me," put on a garment of kusa grass… a garment of bark… a garment of wooden planks… a blanket of human hair… a blanket of horse-hair… a garment of owls' wings… an antelope hide, and engaged in sexual intercourse. He became remorseful… and so on… "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing expulsion." At that time a certain bhikkhu who was going for alms saw a little girl lying on a stool and, lustful, inserted his thumb into her organ. She died. He became remorseful… and so on… "Bhikkhu, there is no offence entailing expulsion, but there is an offence requiring a meeting of the Sangha."

[68] At that time a certain young man was infatuated with the bhikkhunī Uppalavaṇṇā. Then, while the bhikkhunī Uppalavaṇṇā had entered the village for alms, that young man entered her hut and remained hidden. In the afternoon the bhikkhunī Uppalavaṇṇā returned from her alms round, washed her feet, entered the hut and sat down on the couch. Then that young man seized the bhikkhunī Uppalavaṇṇā and violated her. The bhikkhunī Uppalavaṇṇā reported the matter to the bhikkhunīs; the bhikkhunīs reported the matter to the bhikkhus; the bhikkhus reported the matter to the Blessed One. "Bhikkhus, there is no offence for one who does not consent."

[69] At that time female characteristics appeared in a certain bhikkhu. They reported the matter to the Blessed One. "Bhikkhus, I allow that same preceptorship, that same ordination, those same years of standing, and that he join the bhikkhunīs. Whatever offences of bhikkhus are shared in common with bhikkhunīs, let him clear those offences in the presence of the bhikkhunīs. Whatever offences of bhikkhus are not shared in common with bhikkhunīs, there is no offence in respect of those." At that time male characteristics appeared in a certain bhikkhunī. They reported the matter to the Blessed One. "Bhikkhus, I allow that same preceptorship, that same ordination, those same years of standing, and that she join the bhikkhus. Whatever offences of bhikkhunīs are shared in common with bhikkhus, let him clear those offences in the presence of the bhikkhus. Whatever offences of bhikkhunīs are not shared in common with bhikkhus, there is no offence in respect of those."

[70] At that time a certain bhikkhu, thinking, "In this way there will be no offence for me," engaged in sexual intercourse with his mother… engaged in sexual intercourse with his daughter… engaged in sexual intercourse with his sister… He became remorseful… and so on… "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing expulsion." At that time a certain bhikkhu engaged in sexual intercourse with his former wife. He became remorseful… and so on… "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing expulsion."

[71] At that time a certain bhikkhu had a supple back. Oppressed by discontent, he took his own male organ into his mouth. He became remorseful… and so on… "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing expulsion." At that time a certain bhikkhu had a pendulous organ. Oppressed by discontent, he inserted his own male organ into his own anus. He became remorseful… and so on… "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing expulsion." At that time a certain bhikkhu saw a corpse, and on that corpse there was a wound near the genital organ. Thinking, "In this way there will be no offence for me," he inserted his male organ into the corpse's organ and brought it out through the wound. He became remorseful… and so on… "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing expulsion." At that time a certain bhikkhu saw a corpse, and on that corpse there was a wound near the genital organ. Thinking, "In this way there will be no offence for me," he inserted his male organ into the wound and brought it out through the organ. He became remorseful… and so on… "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing expulsion." At that time a certain bhikkhu, being lustful, touched with his male organ the sexual part of a plaster image. He became remorseful… and so on… "Bhikkhu, there is no offence entailing expulsion, but there is an offence of wrongdoing." At that time a certain bhikkhu, being lustful, touched with his male organ the sexual part of a wooden doll. He became remorseful… and so on… "Bhikkhu, there is no offence entailing expulsion, but there is an offence of wrongdoing."

[72] At that time a bhikkhu named Sundara, who had gone forth from Rājagaha, was walking along a carriage road. A certain woman said, "Wait a moment, venerable sir, I will pay respects." As she paid respects she lifted up his inner robe and took his male organ into her mouth. He became remorseful… and so on… "Did you consent, bhikkhu?" "I did not consent, Blessed One." "Bhikkhu, there is no offence for one who does not consent." At that time a certain woman, seeing a bhikkhu, said this: "Come, venerable sir, engage in sexual intercourse." "Enough, sister, that is not allowable." "Come, venerable sir, I will make the effort, you make no effort; in this way there will be no offence for you." That bhikkhu did so. He became remorseful… and so on… "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing expulsion." At that time a certain woman, seeing a bhikkhu, said this: "Come, venerable sir, engage in sexual intercourse." "Enough, sister, that is not allowable." "Come, venerable sir, you make the effort, I will make no effort; in this way there will be no offence for you." That bhikkhu did so. He became remorseful… and so on… "Bhikkhu, you have fallen into an offence entailing expulsion." At that time a certain woman, seeing a bhikkhu, said this: "Come, venerable sir, engage in sexual intercourse." "Enough, sister, that is not allowable." "Come, venerable sir, rub inside and emit outside… and so on… rub outside and emit inside;
