Pārājikapāḷi — 1. Pārājikakaṇḍaṃ
vin01m.mul.xml, verses 24-43

[24] Now at that time, not far from Vesālī, there was a village named Kalanda. There a merchant's son named Sudinna, son of Kalanda, was living. Then Sudinna Kalandaputta went to Vesālī together with a number of companions on some business. At that time the Blessed One was seated teaching the Dhamma, surrounded by a great assembly. Sudinna Kalandaputta saw the Blessed One seated teaching the Dhamma, surrounded by a great assembly. Having seen him, this thought occurred to him: "What if I too were to listen to the Dhamma?" Then Sudinna Kalandaputta approached that assembly; having approached, he sat down to one side. As he was sitting to one side, this thought occurred to Sudinna Kalandaputta: "As I understand the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One, it is not easy for one dwelling at home to lead the holy life utterly complete, utterly pure, polished like a conch shell. What if I were to shave off my hair and beard, put on ochre robes, and go forth from home into homelessness?" Then that assembly, having been instructed, urged on, roused, and gladdened by the Blessed One with a talk on the Dhamma, rose from their seats, paid homage to the Blessed One, circumambulated him keeping him on the right, and departed.

[25] Then, soon after the assembly had risen, Sudinna Kalandaputta approached the Blessed One; having approached, he paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down to one side. Sitting to one side, Sudinna Kalandaputta said to the Blessed One: "Venerable sir, as I understand the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One, it is not easy for one dwelling at home to lead the holy life utterly complete, utterly pure, polished like a conch shell. Venerable sir, I wish to shave off my hair and beard, put on ochre robes, and go forth from home into homelessness. May the Blessed One give me the going forth." "But, Sudinna, have you been given permission by your mother and father to go forth from home into homelessness?" "No, venerable sir, I have not been given permission by my mother and father to go forth from home into homelessness." "Sudinna, Tathāgatas do not give the going forth to a son who has not been given permission by his mother and father." "Venerable sir, I will act in such a way that my mother and father will give me permission to go forth from home into homelessness."

[26] Then Sudinna Kalandaputta, having finished his business in Vesālī, went to Kalanda village, to his mother and father; having approached them, he said to his mother and father: "Mother, father, as I understand the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One, it is not easy for one dwelling at home to lead the holy life utterly complete, utterly pure, polished like a conch shell. I wish to shave off my hair and beard, put on ochre robes, and go forth from home into homelessness. Give me permission to go forth from home into homelessness." When he had spoken thus, Sudinna Kalandaputta's mother and father said to him: "Dear Sudinna, you are our only son, dear and beloved to us, brought up in comfort, tended in comfort. You know nothing of suffering, dear Sudinna. Even by death we would be parted from you against our will — so how could we, while you are alive, give you permission to go forth from home into homelessness?" A second time Sudinna Kalandaputta said to his mother and father: "Mother, father, as I understand the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One, it is not easy for one dwelling at home to lead the holy life utterly complete, utterly pure, polished like a conch shell. I wish to shave off my hair and beard, put on ochre robes, and go forth from home into homelessness. Give me permission to go forth from home into homelessness." A second time Sudinna Kalandaputta's mother and father said to him: "Dear Sudinna, you are our only son, dear and beloved to us, brought up in comfort, tended in comfort. You know nothing of suffering, dear Sudinna. Even by death we would be parted from you against our will — so how could we, while you are alive, give you permission to go forth from home into homelessness!" A third time Sudinna Kalandaputta said to his mother and father: "Mother, father, as I understand the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One, it is not easy for one dwelling at home to lead the holy life utterly complete, utterly pure, polished like a conch shell. I wish to shave off my hair and beard, put on ochre robes, and go forth from home into homelessness. Give me permission to go forth from home into homelessness." A third time Sudinna Kalandaputta's mother and father said to him: "Dear Sudinna, you are our only son, dear and beloved to us, brought up in comfort, tended in comfort. You know nothing of suffering, dear Sudinna. Even by death we would be parted from you against our will — so how could we, while you are alive, give you permission to go forth from home into homelessness!"

[27] Then Sudinna Kalandaputta, thinking, "My mother and father do not give me permission to go forth from home into homelessness," lay down right there on the bare ground, saying: "Here I shall either die or go forth." Then Sudinna Kalandaputta did not eat one meal, did not eat two meals, did not eat three meals, did not eat four meals, did not eat five meals, did not eat six meals, did not eat seven meals.

[28] Then Sudinna Kalandaputta's mother and father said to him: "Dear Sudinna, you are our only son, dear and beloved to us, brought up in comfort, tended in comfort. You know nothing of suffering, dear Sudinna. Even by death we would be parted from you against our will — so how could we, while you are alive, give you permission to go forth from home into homelessness? Get up, dear Sudinna, eat and drink and enjoy yourself; while eating, drinking, and enjoying yourself, delight in indulging in sensual pleasures and in making merit. We do not give you permission to go forth from home into homelessness." When this was said, Sudinna Kalandaputta remained silent. A second time... and a third time Sudinna Kalandaputta's mother and father said to him: "Dear Sudinna, you are our only son, dear and beloved to us, brought up in comfort, tended in comfort. You know nothing of suffering, dear Sudinna. Even by death we would be parted from you against our will — so how could we, while you are alive, give you permission to go forth from home into homelessness! Get up, dear Sudinna, eat and drink and enjoy yourself; while eating, drinking, and enjoying yourself, delight in indulging in sensual pleasures and in making merit. We do not give you permission to go forth from home into homelessness." A third time Sudinna Kalandaputta remained silent. Then Sudinna Kalandaputta's companions approached him; having approached, they said to Sudinna Kalandaputta: "Friend Sudinna, you are your mother and father's only son, dear and beloved, brought up in comfort, tended in comfort. You know nothing of suffering, friend Sudinna. Even by death your mother and father would be parted from you against their will — so how would they, while you are alive, give you permission to go forth from home into homelessness! Get up, friend Sudinna, eat and drink and enjoy yourself; while eating, drinking, and enjoying yourself, delight in indulging in sensual pleasures and in making merit. Your mother and father will not give you permission to go forth from home into homelessness." When this was said, Sudinna Kalandaputta remained silent. A second time... and a third time Sudinna Kalandaputta's companions said to him: "Friend Sudinna, you are..." ... A third time Sudinna Kalandaputta remained silent.

[29] Then Sudinna Kalandaputta's companions approached his mother and father; having approached, they said to Sudinna Kalandaputta's mother and father: "Mother, father, this Sudinna is lying on the bare ground, saying, 'Here I shall either die or go forth.' If you do not give Sudinna permission to go forth from home into homelessness, he will die right there. But if you do give Sudinna permission to go forth from home into homelessness, you will still see him even after he has gone forth. And if Sudinna does not find delight in the going forth from home into homelessness, what other destination will there be for him? He will come back here. Give Sudinna permission to go forth from home into homelessness." "Dear friends, we give Sudinna permission to go forth from home into homelessness." Then Sudinna Kalandaputta's companions approached him; having approached, they said to Sudinna Kalandaputta: "Get up, friend Sudinna, you have been given permission by your mother and father to go forth from home into homelessness."

[30] Then Sudinna Kalandaputta, thinking, "It seems I have been given permission by my mother and father to go forth from home into homelessness," delighted and elated, stroking his limbs with his hand, got up. Then Sudinna Kalandaputta, after regaining his strength over a few days, approached the Blessed One; having approached, he paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down to one side. Sitting to one side, Sudinna Kalandaputta said to the Blessed One: "Venerable sir, I have been given permission by my mother and father to go forth from home into homelessness. May the Blessed One give me the going forth." So Sudinna Kalandaputta received the going forth in the presence of the Blessed One, and he received the higher ordination. And not long after his higher ordination, the venerable Sudinna undertook and practiced such ascetic qualities as these: he was a forest dweller, an alms-food eater, a rag-robe wearer, one who went on continuous alms round; and he dwelt in dependence on a certain Vajjian village. Now at that time the Vajjian country was suffering famine, hard to get food, the crops blighted white, and people were living on ration tickets; it was not easy to keep going by gleaning and begging. Then this thought occurred to the venerable Sudinna: "At present the Vajjian country is suffering famine, hard to get food, the crops blighted white, and people are living on ration tickets; it is not easy to keep going by gleaning and begging. But I have many relatives in Vesālī, wealthy, of great riches, of great possessions, with abundant gold and silver, abundant means of enjoyment, abundant wealth and grain. What if I were to live in dependence on my relatives? My relatives, in dependence on me, will give gifts and make merit, the monks will obtain gains, and I shall not be troubled about alms-food." Then the venerable Sudinna put his lodging in order, took his bowl and robe, and set out for Vesālī. Journeying in stages, he arrived at Vesālī. There the venerable Sudinna dwelt at Vesālī in the Great Wood, in the Hall with the Peaked Roof. The venerable Sudinna's relatives heard: "It seems Sudinna Kalandaputta has arrived at Vesālī." They brought to the venerable Sudinna an offering of food of some sixty pots of cooked rice. Then the venerable Sudinna gave away those sixty pots of cooked rice to the monks, and in the morning he dressed, took his bowl and robe, and entered Kalanda village for alms. As he was walking on continuous alms round in Kalanda village, he came to his own father's residence.

[31] Now at that time a slave woman of the venerable Sudinna's family wished to thro
