Pārājikapāḷi — 1. Pārājikakaṇḍaṃ
vin01m.mul.xml, verses 44-63

[44] "Whatever bhikkhu, having undertaken the training and the mode of life of the bhikkhus, should, without having renounced the training and without having declared his weakness, engage in sexual intercourse, even with a female animal — he is one who is defeated, he is not in communion."

[45] "Whatever" means: whoever, of whatever sort, however constituted, of whatever birth, of whatever name, of whatever clan, of whatever conduct, of whatever dwelling, of whatever resort, whether senior or newly ordained or of middle standing — he is called "whatever." "Bhikkhu" means: he is a beggar, therefore a bhikkhu; he has undertaken the practice of going for alms, therefore a bhikkhu; he is a wearer of pieced-together cloth, therefore a bhikkhu; a bhikkhu by common designation; a bhikkhu by his own acknowledgement; a bhikkhu by the words "Come, bhikkhu"; a bhikkhu as one ordained by the three goings-for-refuge; a good bhikkhu; a bhikkhu of substance; a bhikkhu in training; a bhikkhu beyond training; a bhikkhu as one fully ordained by a unanimous Sangha, by an act with the motion as the fourth, an act unchallengeable and fit to stand. Herein, that bhikkhu who is fully ordained by a unanimous Sangha, by an act with the motion as the fourth, an act unchallengeable and fit to stand — he is the bhikkhu intended in this connection. "Training": there are three trainings — the training in higher virtue, the training in the higher mind, the training in higher wisdom. Herein, the training in higher virtue is the training intended in this connection. "Mode of life" is whatever training rule has been laid down by the Blessed One; that is called the mode of life. In that he trains; therefore it is said, "one who has undertaken the mode of life." "Without having renounced the training and without having declared his weakness": there is, bhikkhus, a declaring of weakness while the training has not been renounced; and there is, bhikkhus, a declaring of weakness while the training has also been renounced. "And how, bhikkhus, is there a declaring of weakness while the training has not been renounced? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who is dissatisfied, discontented, desiring to fall away from the recluse's life, troubled by, ashamed of and disgusted with the state of a bhikkhu, longing for the state of a householder, longing for the state of a lay follower, longing for the state of a monastery attendant, longing for the state of a novice, longing for the state of a sectarian, longing for the state of a sectarian's disciple, longing for the state of a non-recluse, longing for the state of one who is not a son of the Sakyans, says and makes known: 'Suppose I were to renounce the Buddha.' In this way too, bhikkhus, there is a declaring of weakness while the training has not been renounced. "Or else, being dissatisfied, discontented, desiring to fall away from the recluse's life, troubled by, ashamed of and disgusted with the state of a bhikkhu, longing for the state of a householder … longing for the state of one who is not a son of the Sakyans, he says and makes known: 'Suppose I were to renounce the Dhamma' … 'Suppose I were to renounce the Sangha' … 'the training' … 'the discipline' … 'the Pātimokkha' … 'the recitation' … 'my preceptor' … 'my teacher' … 'my fellow-resident' … 'my pupil' … 'one who shares my preceptor' … 'one who shares my teacher' … 'Suppose I were to renounce my fellow in the holy life' — so he says and makes known. He says and makes known: 'Suppose I were to be a householder.' 'Suppose I were to be a lay follower' … 'Suppose I were to be a monastery attendant' … 'Suppose I were to be a novice' … 'Suppose I were to be a sectarian' … 'Suppose I were to be a sectarian's disciple' … 'Suppose I were to be a non-recluse' … 'Suppose I were to be one who is not a son of the Sakyans' — so he says and makes known. In this way too, bhikkhus, there is a declaring of weakness while the training has not been renounced.

[46] "Or else, being dissatisfied, discontented, desiring to fall away from the recluse's life, troubled by, ashamed of and disgusted with the state of a bhikkhu, longing for the state of a householder … longing for the state of one who is not a son of the Sakyans, he says and makes known: 'What if I were to renounce the Buddha?' … 'What if I were to be one who is not a son of the Sakyans?' … 'Perhaps I might renounce the Buddha' … 'Perhaps I might be one who is not a son of the Sakyans' … 'Come now, let me renounce the Buddha' … 'Come now, let me be one who is not a son of the Sakyans' … 'It occurs to me that I might renounce the Buddha' … 'It occurs to me that I might be one who is not a son of the Sakyans' — so he says and makes known. In this way too, bhikkhus, there is a declaring of weakness while the training has not been renounced.

[47] "Or else, being dissatisfied, discontented, desiring to fall away from the recluse's life, troubled by, ashamed of and disgusted with the state of a bhikkhu, longing for the state of a householder … longing for the state of one who is not a son of the Sakyans, he says and makes known: 'I remember my mother' … 'I remember my father' … 'I remember my brother' … 'I remember my sister' … 'I remember my son' … 'I remember my daughter' … 'I remember my wife' … 'I remember my relatives' … 'I remember my friends' … 'I remember my village' … 'I remember my town' … 'I remember my field' … 'I remember my land' … 'I remember my money' … 'I remember my gold' … 'I remember my craft' … 'I recall the laughter, the talk and the play of former times' — so he says and makes known. In this way too, bhikkhus, there is a declaring of weakness while the training has not been renounced.

[48] "Or else, being dissatisfied, discontented, desiring to fall away from the recluse's life, troubled by, ashamed of and disgusted with the state of a bhikkhu, longing for the state of a householder … longing for the state of one who is not a son of the Sakyans, he says and makes known: 'I have a mother, she must be supported by me' … 'I have a father, he must be supported by me' … 'I have a brother, he must be supported by me' … 'I have a sister, she must be supported by me' … 'I have a son, he must be supported by me' … 'I have a daughter, she must be supported by me' … 'I have a wife, she must be supported by me' … 'I have relatives, they must be supported by me' … 'I have friends, they must be supported by me' — so he says and makes known. In this way too, bhikkhus, there is a declaring of weakness while the training has not been renounced.

[49] "Or else, being dissatisfied, discontented, desiring to fall away from the recluse's life, troubled by, ashamed of and disgusted with the state of a bhikkhu, longing for the state of a householder … longing for the state of one who is not a son of the Sakyans, he says and makes known: 'I have a mother, she will support me' … 'I have a father, he will support me' … 'I have a brother, he will support me' … 'I have a sister, she will support me' … 'I have a son, he will support me' … 'I have a daughter, she will support me' … 'I have a wife, she will support me' … 'I have relatives, they will support me' … 'I have friends, they will support me' … 'I have a village, by it I shall live' … 'I have a town, by it I shall live' … 'I have a field, by it I shall live' … 'I have land, by it I shall live' … 'I have money, by it I shall live' … 'I have gold, by it I shall live' … 'I have a craft, by it I shall live' — so he says and makes known. In this way too, bhikkhus, there is a declaring of weakness while the training has not been renounced.

[50] "Or else, being dissatisfied, discontented, desiring to fall away from the recluse's life, troubled by, ashamed of and disgusted with the state of a bhikkhu, longing for the state of a householder … longing for the state of one who is not a son of the Sakyans, he says and makes known: 'It is hard to do' … 'It is not easy to do' … 'It is hard to practise' … 'It is not easy to practise' … 'I cannot keep it up' … 'I am not able' … 'I take no delight' … 'I find no pleasure in it' — so he says and makes known. In this way too, bhikkhus, there is a declaring of weakness while the training has not been renounced.

[51] "And how, bhikkhus, is there a declaring of weakness while the training has also been renounced? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who is dissatisfied, discontented, desiring to fall away from the recluse's life, troubled by, ashamed of and disgusted with the state of a bhikkhu, longing for the state of a householder … longing for the state of one who is not a son of the Sakyans, says and makes known: 'I renounce the Buddha.' In this way, bhikkhus, there is a declaring of weakness while the training has also been renounced. "Or else, being dissatisfied, discontented, desiring to fall away from the recluse's life, troubled by, ashamed of and disgusted with the state of a bhikkhu, longing for the state of a householder … longing for the state of one who is not a son of the Sakyans, he says and makes known: 'I renounce the Dhamma' … 'I renounce the Sangha' … 'I renounce the training' … 'I renounce the discipline' … 'I renounce the Pātimokkha' … 'I renounce the recitation' … 'I renounce my preceptor' … 'I renounce my teacher' … 'I renounce my fellow-resident' … 'I renounce my pupil' … 'I renounce one who shares my preceptor' … 'I renounce one who shares my teacher' … 'I renounce my fellow in the holy life' … 'Consider me a householder' … 'Consider me a lay follower' … 'Consider me a monastery attendant' … 'Consider me a novice' … 'Consider me a sectarian' … 'Consider me a sectarian's disciple' … 'Consider me a non-recluse' … 'Consider me one who is not a son of the Sakyans' — so he says and makes known. In this way too, bhikkhus, there is a declaring of weakness while the training has also been renounced.

[52] "Or else, being dissatisfied, discontented, desiring to fall away from the recluse's life, troubled by, ashamed of and disgusted with the state of a bhikkhu, longing for the state of a householder … longing for the state of one who is not a son of the Sakyans, he says and makes known: 'Enough of the Buddha for me' … 'Enough of my fellows in the holy life for me' — so he says and makes known. In this way too … Or else … he says and makes known: 'What is the Buddha to me?' … 'What are my fellows in the holy life to me?' … 'I have no need of the Buddha' … 'I have no need of my fellows in the holy life' … 'I am well rid of the Buddha' … 'I am well rid of my fellows in the holy life' — so he says and makes known. In this way too, bhikkhus, there is a declaring of weakness while the training has also been renounced.

[53] "Or else, whatever other synonyms there may be for the Buddha, or synonyms for the Dhamma, or synonyms for the Sangha, or synonyms for the training, or synonyms for the discipline, or synonyms for the Pātimokkha, or synonyms for the recitation, or synonyms for a preceptor, or synonyms for a teacher, or synonyms for a fellow-resident, or synonyms for a pupil, or synonyms for one who shares the same preceptor, or synonyms for one who shares the same teacher, or synonyms for a fellow in the holy life, or synonyms for a householder, or synonyms for a lay follower, or synonyms for a monastery attendant, or synonyms for a novice, or synonyms for a sectarian, or synonyms for a sectarian's disciple, or synonyms for a non-recluse, or synonyms for one who is not a son of the Sakyans — if he speaks and makes known by those modes, by those marks, by those signs, then in this way too, bhikkhus, there is a declaring of weakness while the training has also been renounced.

[54] "And how, bhikkhus, is the training not renounced? Here, bhikkhus, by whatever modes, whatever marks, whatever signs the training is renounced — if by those modes, those marks, those signs a madman renounces the training, the training is not renounced. If he renounces the training in the presence of a madman, the training is not renounced. If one deranged in mind renounces the training, the training is not renounced. If he renounces the training in the presence of one deranged in mind, the training is not renounced. If one racked with pain renounces the training, the training is not renounced. If he renounces the training in the presence of one racked with pain, the training is not renounced. If he renounces the training in the presence of a deity, the training is not renounced. If he renounces the training in the presence of an animal, the training is not renounced. If he renounces the training in the Aryan tongue in the presence of a barbarian and the latter does not understand, the training is not renounced. If he renounces the training in a barbarian tongue in the presence of one who speaks the Aryan tongue and the latter does not understand, the training is not renounced. If he renounces the training in the Aryan tongue in the presence of an Aryan-speaker and the latter does not understand, the training is not renounced. If he renounces the training in a barbarian tongue in the presence of a barbarian and the latter does not understand, the training is not renounced. If he renounces the training in jest, the training is not renounced. If he renounces the training in a hasty slip of speech, the training is not renounced. If, not wishing to make it heard, he makes it heard, the training is not renounced. If, wishing to make it heard, he does not make it heard, the training is not renounced. If he makes it heard by one who does not comprehend, the training is not renounced. If he does not make it heard by one who comprehends, the training is not renounced. Or if he does not make it heard at all, the training is not renounced. In this way, bhikkhus, the training is not renounced."

[55] "Sexual intercourse" means: that which is the bad practice, the village practice, the practice of the vile, the coarse thing, that which ends in a washing, the secret thing, the coming together of a pair — this is called sexual intercourse. "Engages in" means: whoever inserts organ into organ, sign into sign, even to the extent of a sesame seed — this is called "engages in." "Even with a female animal" means: having engaged in sexual intercourse even with a female animal he becomes a non-recluse, one who is not a son of the Sakyans — how much more so with a human woman. Therefore it is said, "even with a female animal." "He is one who is defeated" means: just as a man whose head has been cut off cannot live by means of that bodily connection, so too a bhikkhu who has engaged in sexual intercourse becomes a non-recluse, one who is not a son of the Sakyans. Therefore it is said, "he is one who is defeated." "Not in communion": communion means a single act, a single recitation, an equal training — this is called communion. That is not shared with him. Therefore it is said, "not in communion."

[56] There are three kinds of women: a human woman, a non-human woman, a female animal. There are three kinds of hermaphrodites: a human hermaphrodite, a non-human hermaphrodite, an animal hermaphrodite. There are three kinds of eunuchs: a human eunuch, a non-human eunuch, an animal eunuch. There are three kinds of males: a human male, a non-human male, an animal male. For one engaging in sexual intercourse with a human woman by any of the three passages there is an offence entailing defeat: in the anal passage, in the urinary passage, in the mouth. With a non-human woman … with a female animal, for one engaging in sexual intercourse by any of the three passages there is an offence entailing defeat: in the anal passage, in the urinary passage, in the mouth. With a human hermaphrodite … with a non-human hermaphrodite … with an animal hermaphrodite, for one engaging in sexual intercourse by any of the three passages there is an offence entailing defeat: in the anal passage, in the urinary passage, in the mouth. With a human eunuch, for one engaging in sexual intercourse by either of the two passages there is an offence entailing defeat: in the anal passage, in the mouth. With a non-human eunuch … with an animal eunuch … with a human male … with a non-human male … with an animal male, for one engaging in sexual intercourse by either of the two passages there is an offence entailing defeat: in the anal passage, in the mouth.

[57] When a bhikkhu's mind is set on engaging in it, if he inserts his organ into the anal passage of a human woman, there is an offence entailing defeat. When a bhikkhu's mind is set on engaging in it, if he inserts his organ into the urinary passage … into the mouth of a human woman, there is an offence entailing defeat. When a bhikkhu's mind is set on engaging in it, if he inserts his organ into the anal passage, the urinary passage or the mouth of a non-human woman … of a female animal … of a human hermaphrodite … of a non-human hermaphrodite … of an animal hermaphrodite, there is an offence entailing defeat. When a bhikkhu's mind is set on engaging in it, if he inserts his organ into the anal passage or the mouth of a human eunuch, there is an offence entailing defeat. When a bhikkhu's mind is set on engaging in it, if he inserts his organ into the anal passage or the mouth of a non-human eunuch … of an animal eunuch … of a human male … of a non-human male … of an animal male, there is an offence entailing defeat.

[58] Enemies of a bhikkhu bring a human woman into the bhikkhu's presence and make her sit down upon his organ with her anal passage. If he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its staying there, consents to its withdrawal, there is an offence entailing defeat. Enemies of a bhikkhu bring a human woman into the bhikkhu's presence and make her sit down upon his organ with her anal passage. If he does not consent to the entry, but consents to its having entered, consents to its staying there, consents to its withdrawal, there is an offence entailing defeat. Enemies of a bhikkhu bring a human woman into the bhikkhu's presence and make her sit down upon his organ with her anal passage. If he does not consent to the entry, does not consent to its having entered, but consents to its staying there, consents to its withdrawal, there is an offence entailing defeat. Enemies of a bhikkhu bring a human woman into the bhikkhu's presence and make her sit down upon his organ with her anal passage. If he does not consent to the entry, does not consent to its having entered, does not consent to its staying there, but consents to its withdrawal, there is an offence entailing defeat. Enemies of a bhikkhu bring a human woman into the bhikkhu's presence and make her sit down upon his organ with her anal passage. If he does not consent to the entry, does not consent to its having entered, does not consent to its staying there, does not consent to its withdrawal, there is no offence. Enemies of a bhikkhu bring a human woman into the bhikkhu's presence and make her sit down upon his organ with her urinary passage … with her mouth. If he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its staying there, consents to its withdrawal, there is an offence entailing defeat … if he does not consent, there is no offence.

[59] Enemies of a bhikkhu bring a human woman who is awake … asleep … drunk … deranged … heedless … dead but not decayed … dead and mostly not decayed … (and so on as above): there is an offence entailing defeat. If they bring one dead and mostly decayed into the bhikkhu's presence and make her sit down upon his organ with the anal passage … with the urinary passage … with the mouth, and he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its staying there, consents to its withdrawal, there is a grave offence … if he does not consent, there is no offence. Enemies of a bhikkhu bring a non-human woman … a female animal … a human hermaphrodite … a non-human hermaphrodite … an animal hermaphrodite into the bhikkhu's presence and make him or her sit down upon his organ with the anal passage … with the urinary passage … with the mouth. If he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its staying there, consents to its withdrawal, there is an offence entailing defeat … if he does not consent, there is no offence. Enemies of a bhikkhu bring an animal hermaphrodite that is awake … asleep … drunk … deranged … heedless … dead but not decayed … dead and mostly not decayed … (and so on): there is an offence entailing defeat. If they bring one dead and mostly decayed into the bhikkhu's presence and make it sit down upon his organ with the anal passage … with the urinary passage … with the mouth, and he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its staying there, consents to its withdrawal, there is a grave offence … if he does not consent, there is no offence. Enemies of a bhikkhu bring a human eunuch … a non-human eunuch … an animal eunuch into the bhikkhu's presence and make him sit down upon his organ with the anal passage … with the mouth. If he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its staying there, consents to its withdrawal, there is an offence entailing defeat … if he does not consent, there is no offence. Enemies of a bhikkhu bring an animal eunuch that is awake … asleep … drunk … deranged … heedless … dead but not decayed … dead and mostly not decayed … (and so on): there is an offence entailing defeat. If they bring one dead and mostly decayed into the bhikkhu's presence and make it sit down upon his organ with the anal passage … with the mouth, and he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its staying there, consents to its withdrawal, there is a grave offence … if he does not consent, there is no offence.

[60] Enemies of a bhikkhu bring a human male … a non-human male … an animal male into the bhikkhu's presence and make him sit down upon his organ with the anal passage … with the mouth. If he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its staying there, consents to its withdrawal, there is an offence entailing defeat … if he does not consent, there is no offence. Enemies of a bhikkhu bring an animal male that is awake … asleep … drunk … deranged … heedless … dead but not decayed … dead and mostly not decayed … (and so on): there is an offence entailing defeat. If they bring one dead and mostly decayed into the bhikkhu's presence and make it sit down upon his organ with the anal passage … with the mouth, and he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its staying there, consents to its withdrawal, there is a grave offence … if he does not consent, there is no offence.

[61] Enemies of a bhikkhu bring a human woman into the bhikkhu's presence and make her sit down upon his organ with the anal passage … with the urinary passage … with the mouth: she being covered and he uncovered, or she uncovered and he covered, or she covered and he covered, or she uncovered and he uncovered. If he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its staying there, consents to its withdrawal, there is an offence entailing defeat … if he does not consent, there is no offence. Enemies of a bhikkhu bring a human woman who is awake … asleep … drunk … deranged … heedless … dead but not decayed … dead and mostly not decayed … (and so on): there is an offence entailing defeat. If they bring one dead and mostly decayed into the bhikkhu's presence and make her sit down upon his organ with the anal passage … with the urinary passage … with the mouth: she being covered and he uncovered, or she uncovered and he covered, or she covered and he covered, or she uncovered and he uncovered — and he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its staying there, consents to its withdrawal, there is a grave offence … if he does not consent, there is no offence. Enemies of a bhikkhu bring a non-human woman … a female animal … a human hermaphrodite … a non-human hermaphrodite … an animal hermaphrodite into the bhikkhu's presence and make it sit down upon his organ with the anal passage … with the urinary passage … with the mouth: it being covered and he uncovered, or it uncovered and he covered, or it covered and he covered, or it uncovered and he uncovered. If he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its staying there, consents to its withdrawal, there is an offence entailing defeat … if he does not consent, there is no offence. Enemies of a bhikkhu bring an animal hermaphrodite that is awake … asleep … drunk … deranged … heedless … dead but not decayed … dead and mostly not decayed … (and so on): there is an offence entailing defeat. If they bring one dead and mostly decayed into the bhikkhu's presence and make it sit down upon his organ with the anal passage … with the urinary passage … with the mouth: it being covered and he uncovered, or it uncovered and he covered, or it covered and he covered, or it uncovered and he uncovered — and he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its staying there, consents to its withdrawal, there is a grave offence … if he does not consent, there is no offence.

[62] Enemies of a bhikkhu bring a human eunuch … a non-human eunuch … an animal eunuch … a human male … a non-human male … an animal male into the bhikkhu's presence and make him sit down upon his organ with the anal passage … with the mouth: he being covered and the bhikkhu uncovered, or he uncovered and the bhikkhu covered, or he covered and the bhikkhu covered, or he uncovered and the bhikkhu uncovered. If he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its staying there, consents to its withdrawal, there is an offence entailing defeat … if he does not consent, there is no offence. Enemies of a bhikkhu bring an animal male that is awake … asleep … drunk … deranged … heedless … dead but not decayed … dead and mostly not decayed … (and so on): there is an offence entailing defeat. If they bring one dead and mostly decayed into the bhikkhu's presence and make it sit down upon his organ with the anal passage … with the mouth: it being covered and he uncovered, or it uncovered and he covered, or it covered and he covered, or it uncovered and he uncovered — and he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its staying there, consents to its withdrawal, there is a grave offence … if he does not consent, there is no offence.

[63] Enemies of a bhikkhu bring the bhikkhu into the presence of a human woman and press his organ into her anal passage … her urinary passage … her mouth. If he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its staying there, consents to its withdrawal, there is an offence entailing defeat … if he does not consent, there is no offence. Enemies of a bhikkhu bring the bhikkhu into the presence of a human woman who is awake … asleep … drunk … deranged … heedless … dead but not decayed … dead and mostly not decayed … (and so on): there is an offence entailing defeat. If they bring him into the presence of one dead and mostly decayed and press his organ into her anal passage … her urinary passage … her mouth, and he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its staying there, consents to its withdrawal, there is a grave offence … if he does not consent, there is no offence. Enemies of a bhikkhu bring the bhikkhu into the presence of a non-human woman … a female animal … a human hermaphrodite … a non-human hermaphrodite … an animal hermaphrodite … a human eunuch … a non-human eunuch … an animal eunuch … a human male … a non-human male … an animal male, and press his organ into the anal passage … the mouth. If he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its staying there, consents to its withdrawal, there is an offence entailing defeat … if he does not consent, there is no offence. Enemies of a bhikkhu bring the bhikkhu into the presence of an animal male that is awake … asleep … drunk … deranged … heedless … dead but not decayed … dead and mostly not decayed … (and so on): there is an offence entailing defeat. If they bring him into the presence of one dead and mostly decayed and press his organ into the anal passage … the mouth, and he consents to the entry, consents to its having entered, consents to its staying there, consents to its withdrawal, there is a grave offence … if he does not consent, there is no offence.
