Pārājikapāḷi — 1. Pārājikakaṇḍaṃ
vin01m.mul.xml, verses 84-103

[84] At that time the Buddha, the Blessed One, was dwelling at Rājagaha on the Gijjhakūṭa mountain. Now at that time a number of bhikkhus who were acquaintances and companions made grass huts on the slope of Isigili and entered upon the rains residence. The venerable Dhaniya the potter's son also made a grass hut and entered upon the rains residence. Then, when those bhikkhus had completed the rains and the three months had passed, they pulled down their grass huts, put away the grass and the timber, and set out on a walking tour through the countryside. But the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son remained dwelling right there through the rains, there through the cold season, and there through the hot season. Then, while the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son had gone into the village for alms, grass-gatherers and wood-gatherers pulled down his grass hut and went off taking the grass and the timber. A second time the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son gathered grass and timber and made a grass hut. A second time, while the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son had gone into the village for alms, grass-gatherers and wood-gatherers pulled down his grass hut and went off taking the grass and the timber. A third time the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son gathered grass and timber and made a grass hut. A third time, while the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son had gone into the village for alms, grass-gatherers and wood-gatherers pulled down his grass hut and went off taking the grass and the timber. Then it occurred to the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son: "For the third time now, while I had gone into the village for alms, grass-gatherers and wood-gatherers have pulled down my grass hut and gone off taking the grass and the timber. Now I am well trained, accomplished, and skilled in the craft of pottery that is my own family's trade. What if I were to knead the clay myself and make a hut entirely of clay?" So the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son kneaded the clay himself, made a hut entirely of clay, gathered grass, timber, and cow dung, and fired that hut. The hut turned out beautiful, lovely, and charming, and red like an indagopaka beetle. And the sound of that hut was just like the sound of a little bell.

[85] Then the Blessed One, coming down from the Gijjhakūṭa mountain together with a number of bhikkhus, saw that hut, beautiful, lovely, charming, and red. Having seen it, he addressed the bhikkhus: "Bhikkhus, what is that thing, beautiful, lovely, charming, and red like an indagopaka beetle?" Then those bhikkhus reported the matter to the Blessed One. The Buddha, the Blessed One, rebuked him: "Bhikkhus, it is not fitting for that foolish man, it is not suitable, not proper, unworthy of a recluse, not allowable, not to be done. How could that foolish man make a hut entirely of clay! Indeed, bhikkhus, that foolish man will have no sympathy, no compassion, no harmlessness toward living beings! Go, bhikkhus, and break down that hut. Let not later generations fall into destroying living beings. And, bhikkhus, a hut entirely of clay should not be made. Whoever should make one commits an offence of wrong-doing." "Yes, venerable sir," those bhikkhus replied to the Blessed One, and they went to where that hut was; having gone there, they broke it down. Then the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son said to those bhikkhus: "Friends, why are you breaking down my hut?" "Friend, the Blessed One has ordered it broken down." "Break it down, friends, if the Lord of the Dhamma has ordered it broken down."

[86] Then it occurred to the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son: "For the third time, while I had gone into the village for alms, grass-gatherers and wood-gatherers pulled down my grass hut and went off taking the grass and the timber. And the hut I made entirely of clay has also been ordered broken down by the Blessed One. Now I have an acquaintance who is the keeper of the timber-yard. What if I were to ask the keeper of the timber-yard for timber and make a wooden hut?" So the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son went to the keeper of the timber-yard; having gone there, he said to the keeper of the timber-yard: "Friend, for the third time, while I had gone into the village for alms, grass-gatherers and wood-gatherers pulled down my grass hut and went off taking the grass and the timber. And the hut I made entirely of clay has also been ordered broken down by the Blessed One. Give me timber, friend. I wish to make a wooden hut." "Venerable sir, there is no such timber that I could give to the master. There is, venerable sir, timber belonging to the king, set aside for repairs to the city in case of emergency. If the king gives that timber, have it carried away, venerable sir." "Friend, it has been given by the king." Then it occurred to the keeper of the timber-yard: "These recluses, sons of the Sakyans, are practisers of Dhamma, practisers of calm, livers of the holy life, speakers of truth, virtuous, of good character. Even the king has confidence in them. He would not say that what has not been given has been given." So the keeper of the timber-yard said to the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son: "Have it carried away, venerable sir." Then the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son had that timber cut up into pieces, had it carted away, and made a wooden hut.

[87] Then the brahmin Vassakāra, chief minister of Magadha, while inspecting the works in Rājagaha, went to the keeper of the timber-yard; having gone there, he said to the keeper of the timber-yard: "I say, where is that timber belonging to the king that was set aside for repairs to the city in case of emergency?" "Sir, that timber was given by His Majesty to the master Dhaniya the potter's son." Then the brahmin Vassakāra, chief minister of Magadha, was displeased: "How can His Majesty give to Dhaniya the potter's son the king's timber that was set aside for repairs to the city in case of emergency!" Then the brahmin Vassakāra, chief minister of Magadha, went to King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha; having gone there, he said to King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha: "Is it true, sire, that Your Majesty gave to Dhaniya the potter's son the king's timber that was set aside for repairs to the city in case of emergency?" "Who says so?" "The keeper of the timber-yard, sire." "Well then, brahmin, have the keeper of the timber-yard summoned." Then the brahmin Vassakāra, chief minister of Magadha, gave orders for the keeper of the timber-yard to be bound. The venerable Dhaniya the potter's son saw the keeper of the timber-yard being led away bound. Having seen him, he said to the keeper of the timber-yard: "Friend, why are you being led away bound?" "Because of that business with the timber, venerable sir." "Go, friend, I too will come." "Come, venerable sir, before I am executed."

[88] Then the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son went to the residence of King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha; having gone there, he sat down on a seat made ready. Then King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha went to the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son; having gone there, he paid homage to the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son and sat down to one side. Seated to one side, King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha said to the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son: "Is it true, venerable sir, that I gave to the master the king's timber that was set aside for repairs to the city in case of emergency?" "Yes, great king." "Venerable sir, we kings have many duties and many things to do; even having given something we might not remember it. Please, venerable sir, remind me." "Do you remember, great king, that when you were newly consecrated you spoke these words: 'Grass, timber, and water are given to recluses and brahmins; let them make use of them'?" "I remember, venerable sir. There are, venerable sir, recluses and brahmins who are conscientious, scrupulous, and desirous of training; scruples arise in them even over a trifle. It was with reference to them that I spoke, and that concerning what is in the forest and unowned. And you, venerable sir, think under that pretext to carry off timber that was not given! How could one like me beat, bind, or banish a recluse or a brahmin living in my realm! Go, venerable sir, you are freed by a hair's breadth. Do not do such a thing again." People grumbled, complained, and criticized: "These recluses, sons of the Sakyans, are shameless, immoral, liars. And yet they will claim to be practisers of Dhamma, practisers of calm, livers of the holy life, speakers of truth, virtuous, of good character! There is no recluseship in these, there is no brahminhood in these. Lost is their recluseship, lost is their brahminhood. Where is their recluseship, where is their brahminhood! They have fallen away from recluseship, they have fallen away from brahminhood. They deceive even the king — how much more other people!" The bhikkhus heard those people grumbling, complaining, and criticizing. Those bhikkhus who were of few wishes, contented, conscientious, scrupulous, and desirous of training grumbled, complained, and criticized: "How can the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son take the king's timber which was not given!" Then those bhikkhus, having rebuked the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son in many ways, reported the matter to the Blessed One. Then the Blessed One, on that occasion and in that connection, had the Sangha of bhikkhus assembled and questioned the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son: "Is it true, Dhaniya, as they say, that you took the king's timber which was not given?" "It is true, Blessed One." The Buddha, the Blessed One, rebuked him: "Foolish man, it is not fitting, not suitable, not proper, unworthy of a recluse, not allowable, not to be done. How could you, foolish man, take the king's timber which was not given! This, foolish man, is not for the confidence of those without confidence nor for the increase of those with confidence; rather, foolish man, it is for the lack of confidence in those without confidence and for the wavering of some of those with confidence." Now at that time a certain bhikkhu who had formerly been a chief minister in judicial affairs was sitting not far from the Blessed One. Then the Blessed One said to that bhikkhu: "For how much, bhikkhu, does King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha, having caught a thief, have him beaten, bound, or banished?" "For a pāda, Blessed One, or for the worth of a pāda." At that time in Rājagaha a pāda was five māsakas. Then the Blessed One, having rebuked the venerable Dhaniya the potter's son in many ways, spoke about being difficult to support … and then he said: "And thus, bhikkhus, should you recite this training rule —

[89] "Whatever bhikkhu should take, by way of theft, what is not given — such a taking of what is not given that kings, having caught a thief, would beat him, bind him, or banish him, saying: 'You are a thief, you are a fool, you are deluded, you are a robber' — a bhikkhu taking in such a way what is not given is also one who is defeated, not in communion." Thus this training rule was laid down by the Blessed One for the bhikkhus.

[90] Now at that time the group-of-six bhikkhus went to a dyers' drying-ground, took away a dyers' bundle of cloth, carried it to the monastery, and divided it up. The bhikkhus said: "You have great merit, friends. Much robe-cloth has accrued to you." "How should there be merit for us, friends? Just now we went to the dyers' drying-ground and took away a dyers' bundle." "But friends, has not a training r
