Pārājikapāḷi — 1. Pārājikakaṇḍaṃ
vin01m.mul.xml, verses 64-83

[64] Monks who were enemies brought a monk into the presence of a human woman and pressed him down with his sexual organ onto her anus … her vagina … her mouth — when he was covered and she uncovered, when he was uncovered and she covered, when both were covered, when both were uncovered. If he consented to the insertion, consented to it having entered, consented to it remaining there, consented to its withdrawal, there is an offence entailing defeat … but if he did not consent, there is no offence. Monks who were enemies brought a monk into the presence of a human woman who was awake … asleep … drunk … insane … heedless … dead but not yet gnawed by animals … dead and mostly not gnawed … there is an offence entailing defeat. They brought him into the presence of one dead and mostly gnawed and pressed him down with his sexual organ onto her anus … her vagina … her mouth — when he was covered and she uncovered, when he was uncovered and she covered, when both were covered, when both were uncovered. If he consented to the insertion, consented to it having entered, consented to it remaining, consented to its withdrawal, there is a grave offence … but if he did not consent, there is no offence. Monks who were enemies brought a monk into the presence of a non-human woman … a female animal … a human hermaphrodite … a non-human hermaphrodite … an animal hermaphrodite … a human paṇḍaka … a non-human paṇḍaka … an animal paṇḍaka … a human man … a non-human man … a male animal, and pressed him down with his sexual organ onto the anus … the mouth — when he was covered and the other uncovered, when he was uncovered and the other covered, when both were covered, when both were uncovered. If he consented to the insertion, consented to it having entered, consented to it remaining, consented to its withdrawal, there is an offence entailing defeat … but if he did not consent, there is no offence.

[65] Monks who were enemies brought a monk into the presence of a male animal that was awake … asleep … drunk … insane … heedless … dead but not gnawed … dead and mostly not gnawed … there is an offence entailing defeat. They brought him into the presence of one dead and mostly gnawed and pressed him down with his sexual organ onto the anus … the mouth — when he was covered and the other uncovered, when he was uncovered and the other covered, when both were covered, when both were uncovered. If he consented to the insertion, consented to it having entered, consented to it remaining, consented to its withdrawal, there is a grave offence … but if he did not consent, there is no offence. Just as the case of enemy monks has been set out in full, so should the rest be set out in full: enemy kings … enemy thieves … enemy rogues … enemy libertines (the "lotus-scented"). In brief.

[66] If he inserts an organ into an orifice, there is an offence entailing defeat. If he inserts an organ into what is not an orifice, there is an offence entailing defeat. If he inserts what is not an organ into an orifice, there is an offence entailing defeat. If he inserts what is not an organ into what is not an orifice, there is a grave offence. A monk misconducts himself with a sleeping monk: if, on waking, the latter consents, both are to be expelled; if, on waking, he does not consent, only the violator is to be expelled. A monk misconducts himself with a sleeping novice: if, on waking, the latter consents, both are to be expelled; if he does not consent, only the violator is to be expelled. A novice misconducts himself with a sleeping monk: if, on waking, the latter consents, both are to be expelled; if he does not consent, only the violator is to be expelled. A novice misconducts himself with a sleeping novice: if, on waking, the latter consents, both are to be expelled; if he does not consent, only the violator is to be expelled. There is no offence for one who does not know, for one who does not consent, for one who is insane, for one deranged in mind, for one overwhelmed by pain, and for the first offender.

[67] At that time a certain monk engaged in sexual intercourse with a female monkey. He became remorseful: "The Blessed One has laid down a training rule; can it be that I have committed an offence entailing defeat?" He reported the matter to the Blessed One. "Monk, you have committed an offence entailing defeat." At that time a number of Vajjian monks of Vesālī engaged in sexual intercourse without having renounced the training and without having declared their weakness. They became remorseful: "The Blessed One has laid down a training rule; can it be that we have committed an offence entailing defeat?" They reported the matter to the Blessed One. "Monks, you have committed an offence entailing defeat." At that time a certain monk, thinking, "In this way there will be no offence for me," engaged in sexual intercourse dressed as a layman. He became remorseful: "The Blessed One has laid down a training rule; can it be that I have committed an offence entailing defeat?" He reported the matter to the Blessed One. "Monk, you have committed an offence entailing defeat." At that time a certain monk, thinking, "In this way there will be no offence for me," engaged in sexual intercourse naked. He became remorseful … "Monk, you have committed an offence entailing defeat." At that time a certain monk, thinking, "In this way there will be no offence for me," engaged in sexual intercourse wearing a garment of kusa grass … a garment of bark … a garment of wood shavings … a blanket of human hair … a blanket of horsehair … a covering of owls' wings … an antelope hide. He became remorseful … "Monk, you have committed an offence entailing defeat." At that time a certain almsgoing monk saw a little girl lying on a small couch, and, filled with lust, he inserted his thumb into her private parts. She died. He became remorseful … "Monk, there is no offence entailing defeat; it is an offence entailing a formal meeting of the Sangha."

[68] At that time a certain young brahmin was infatuated with the nun Uppalavaṇṇā. Then, while the nun Uppalavaṇṇā had entered the village for alms, that young brahmin entered her hut and hid himself there. The nun Uppalavaṇṇā, returning after the meal from her almsround, washed her feet, entered the hut, and sat down on the small bed. Then that young brahmin seized the nun Uppalavaṇṇā and raped her. The nun Uppalavaṇṇā told the nuns about this matter. The nuns told the monks. The monks reported the matter to the Blessed One. "Monks, there is no offence for one who does not consent."

[69] At that time the characteristics of a woman appeared in a certain monk. They reported the matter to the Blessed One. "Monks, I allow that very same preceptor, that very same ordination, and those very same years [of seniority] to be transferred to the nuns' community. Those offences of monks that are shared in common with nuns are to be cleared in the presence of the nuns; as for those offences of monks that are not shared in common with nuns, for those offences there is no offence." At that time the characteristics of a man appeared in a certain nun. They reported the matter to the Blessed One. "Monks, I allow that very same preceptor, that very same ordination, and those very same years [of seniority] to be transferred to the monks' community. Those offences of nuns that are shared in common with monks are to be cleared in the presence of the monks; as for those offences of nuns that are not shared in common with monks, for those offences there is no offence."

[70] At that time a certain monk, thinking, "In this way there will be no offence for me," engaged in sexual intercourse with his mother … engaged in sexual intercourse with his daughter … engaged in sexual intercourse with his sister. He became remorseful … "Monk, you have committed an offence entailing defeat." At that time a certain monk engaged in sexual intercourse with his former wife. He became remorseful … "Monk, you have committed an offence entailing defeat."

[71] At that time a certain monk had a supple back. Oppressed by dissatisfaction, he took his own sexual organ in his mouth. He became remorseful … "Monk, you have committed an offence entailing defeat." At that time a certain monk had a pendulous organ. Oppressed by dissatisfaction, he inserted his own sexual organ into his own anus. He became remorseful … "Monk, you have committed an offence entailing defeat." At that time a certain monk saw a corpse, and on that corpse there was a wound near the genitals. Thinking, "In this way there will be no offence for me," he inserted his sexual organ into the genitals and drew it out through the wound. He became remorseful … "Monk, you have committed an offence entailing defeat." At that time a certain monk saw a corpse, and on that corpse there was a wound near the genitals. Thinking, "In this way there will be no offence for me," he inserted his sexual organ into the wound and drew it out through the genitals. He became remorseful … "Monk, you have committed an offence entailing defeat." At that time a certain monk, filled with lust, touched with his sexual organ the private parts of a clay figure. He became remorseful … "Monk, there is no offence entailing defeat; it is an offence of wrongdoing." At that time a certain monk, filled with lust, touched with his sexual organ the private parts of a wooden doll. He became remorseful … "Monk, there is no offence entailing defeat; it is an offence of wrongdoing."

[72] At that time a monk named Sundara, who had gone forth from Rājagaha, was going along a carriage road. A certain woman said, "Wait a moment, venerable sir, I will pay respects," and while paying respects she lifted up his inner robe and took his sexual organ in her mouth. He became remorseful … "Monk, did you consent?" "I did not consent, Blessed One." "Monk, there is no offence for one who does not consent." At that time a certain woman, seeing a monk, said to him: "Come, venerable sir, engage in sexual intercourse." "Enough, sister, that is not allowable." "Come, venerable sir, I will make the effort, you make no effort; in this way there will be no offence for you." That monk did so. He became remorseful … "Monk, you have committed an offence entailing defeat." At that time a certain woman, seeing a monk, said to him: "Come, venerable sir, engage in sexual intercourse." "Enough, sister, that is not allowable." "Come, venerable sir, you make the effort, I will make no effort; in this way there will be no offence for you." That monk did so. He became remorseful … "Monk, you have committed an offence entailing defeat." At that time a certain woman, seeing a monk, said to him: "Come, venerable sir, engage in sexual intercourse." "Enough, sister, that is not allowable." "Come, venerable sir, insert it inside and release outside … insert it outside and release inside; in this way there will be no offence for you." That monk did so. He became remorseful … "Monk, you have committed an offence entailing defeat."

[73] At that time a certain monk went to a charnel ground, saw a corpse that had not been gnawed, and engaged in sexual intercourse with it. He became remorseful … "Monk, you have committed an offence entailing defeat." At that time a certain monk went to a charnel ground, saw a corpse that was mostly not gnawed, and engaged in sexual intercourse with it. He became remorseful … "Monk, you have committed an offence entailing defeat." At that time a certain monk went to a charnel ground, saw a corpse that was mostly gnawed, and engaged in sexual intercourse with it. He became remorseful … "Monk, there is no offence entailing defeat; it is a grave offence." At that time a certain monk went to a charnel ground, saw a severed head, and, touching the open mouth, inserted his sexual organ. He became remorseful … "Monk, you have committed an offence entailing defeat." At that time a certain monk went to a charnel ground, saw a severed head, and inserted his sexual organ into the open mouth without touching it. He became remorseful … "Monk, there is no offence entailing defeat; it is an offence of wrongdoing." At that time a certain monk was infatuated with a certain woman. She died and was discarded in a cemetery, and her bones lay scattered about. Then that monk went to the charnel ground, gathered the bones together, and applied his sexual organ to the place of the private parts. He became remorseful … "Monk, there is no offence entailing defeat; it is an offence of wrongdoing." At that time a certain monk engaged in sexual intercourse with a female nāga … with a female yakkha … with a female ghost … with a paṇḍaka. He became remorseful … "Monk, you have committed an offence entailing defeat." At that time a certain monk had damaged faculties. Thinking, "I feel neither pleasure nor pain, so there will be no offence for me," he engaged in sexual intercourse. They reported the matter to the Blessed One. "Monks, whether that foolish man felt anything or did not feel anything, it is an offence entailing defeat." At that time a certain monk, thinking, "I shall engage in sexual intercourse with a woman," felt remorse as soon as he had touched her. He became remorseful … "Monk, there is no offence entailing defeat; it is an offence entailing a formal meeting of the Sangha."

[74] At that time a certain monk at Bhaddiya, in the Jātiyā Grove, had gone for the day's abiding and was lying down. His limbs became stiff with wind. A certain woman saw him, sat down upon his sexual organ, took her pleasure as she wished, and departed. The monks, seeing him soiled, reported the matter to the Blessed One. "Monks, in five ways the sexual organ becomes erect: through lust, through faeces, through urine, through wind, and through being bitten by a caterpillar. In these five ways, monks, the sexual organ becomes erect. It is impossible, monks, it cannot happen, that this monk's organ was erect through lust. That monk is an arahant. There is no offence, monks, for that monk." At that time a certain monk at Sāvatthī, in the Blind Men's Grove, had gone for the day's abiding and was lying down. A certain cowherd woman saw him and sat down upon his sexual organ. That monk consented to the insertion, consented to it having entered, consented to it remaining, consented to its withdrawal. He became remorseful … "Monk, you have committed an offence entailing defeat." At that time a certain monk at Sāvatthī, in the Blind Men's Grove, had gone for the day's abiding and was lying down. A certain goatherd woman saw him … a certain firewood-gatherer saw him … a certain cow-dung gatherer saw him and sat down upon his sexual organ. That monk consented to the insertion, consented to it having entered, consented to it remaining, consented to its withdrawal. He became remorseful … "Monk, you have committed an offence entailing defeat."

[75] At that time a certain monk at Vesālī, in the Great Wood, had gone for the day's abiding and was lying down. A certain woman saw him, sat down upon his sexual organ, took her pleasure as she wished, and then stood nearby laughing. That monk woke up and said to that woman: "Is this your doing?" "Yes, it is my doing." He became remorseful … "Monk, did you consent?" "I did not know of it, Blessed One." "Monk, there is no offence for one who does not know."

[76] At that time a certain monk at Vesālī, in the Great Wood, had gone for the day's abiding and was lying down leaning against a tree. A certain woman saw him and sat down upon his sexual organ. That monk got up at once. He became remorseful … "Monk, did you consent?" "I did not consent, Blessed One." "Monk, there is no offence for one who does not consent." At that time a certain monk at Vesālī, in the Great Wood, had gone for the day's abiding and was lying down leaning against a tree. A certain woman saw him and sat down upon his sexual organ. That monk kicked her off and threw her down. He became remorseful … "Monk, did you consent?" "I did not consent, Blessed One." "Monk, there is no offence for one who does not consent."

[77] At that time a certain monk at Vesālī, in the Great Wood, in the Hall with the Peaked Roof, had gone for the day's abiding and was lying down with the door open. His limbs became stiff with wind. Now at that time a number of women came to the monastery bringing perfume and garlands, wishing to look at the dwellings. Then those women, seeing that monk, sat down upon his sexual organ, took their pleasure as they wished, and saying, "What a bull of a man!" they laid the perfume and garlands upon him and departed. The monks, seeing him soiled, reported the matter to the Blessed One. "Monks, in five ways the sexual organ becomes erect: through lust, through faeces, through urine, through wind, and through being bitten by a caterpillar. In these five ways, monks, the sexual organ becomes erect. It is impossible, monks, it cannot happen, that this monk's organ was erect through lust. That monk is an arahant. There is no offence, monks, for that monk. Monks, I allow one who goes into seclusion by day to close the door before going into seclusion."

[78] At that time a certain monk of Bhārukaccha, having engaged in sexual intercourse with his former wife in a dream, thought, "I am not an ascetic, I shall disrobe," and while going to Bhārukaccha he met the venerable Upāli on the way and told him the matter. The venerable Upāli said: "Friend, there is no offence for what occurs in a dream." At that time in Rājagaha there was a laywoman named Supabbā of naive faith. She held this view: "A woman who gives sexual intercourse gives the highest gift." She saw a monk and said to him: "Come, venerable sir, engage in sexual intercourse." "Enough, sister, that is not allowable." "Come, venerable sir, rub between my thighs; in this way there will be no offence for you." … "Come, venerable sir, rub at my navel … Come, venerable sir, rub on my belly … Come, venerable sir, rub in my armpit … Come, venerable sir, rub at my neck … Come, venerable sir, rub in my ear-hole … Come, venerable sir, rub in my mass of hair … Come, venerable sir, rub between my fingers … Come, venerable sir, I will use my hand and make you release; in this way there will be no offence for you." That monk did so. He became remorseful … "Monk, there is no offence entailing defeat; it is an offence entailing a formal meeting of the Sangha."

[79] At that time in Sāvatthī there was a laywoman named Saddhā of naive faith. She held this view: "A woman who gives sexual intercourse gives the highest gift." She saw a monk and said to him: "Come, venerable sir, engage in sexual intercourse." "Enough, sister, that is not allowable." "Come, venerable sir, rub between my thighs … Come, venerable sir, I will use my hand and make you release; in this way there will be no offence for you." That monk did so. He became remorseful … "Monk, there is no offence entailing defeat; it is an offence entailing a formal meeting of the Sangha."

[80] At that time in Vesālī the Licchavi youths seized a monk and made him misconduct himself with a nun … made him misconduct himself with a probationer … made him misconduct himself with a female novice. If both consented, both are to be expelled. If both did not consent, there is no offence for either.

[81] At that time in Vesālī the Licchavi youths seized a monk and made him misconduct himself with a prostitute … with a paṇḍaka … with a laywoman. If the monk consented, the monk is to be expelled. If the monk did not consent, there is no offence for the monk. At that time in Vesālī the Licchavi youths seized monks and made them misconduct themselves with one another. If both consented, both are to be expelled. If both did not consent, there is no offence for either.

[82] At that time a certain monk who had gone forth in old age went to see his former wife. She seized him, saying, "Come, venerable sir, disrobe." As he drew back, he fell down on his back. She lifted up her clothes and sat down upon his sexual organ. He became remorseful … "Monk, did you consent?" "I did not consent, Blessed One." "Monk, there is no offence for one who does not consent."

[83] At that time a certain monk was dwelling in the forest. A young deer came to the place where he urinated and, while drinking the urine, took his sexual organ in its mouth. That monk consented. He became remorseful … "Monk, you have committed an offence entailing defeat."

----------------------------------------
Original (Pali, IAST):

[64] Bhikkhupaccatthikā bhikkhuṃ manussitthiyā santike ānetvā aṅgajātena vaccamaggaṃ… passāvamaggaṃ… mukhaṃ abhinisīdenti santhatassa asanthatāya, asanthatassa santhatāya, santhatassa santhatāya, asanthatassa asanthatāya. So ce pavesanaṃ sādiyati, paviṭṭhaṃ sādiyati, ṭhitaṃ sādiyati, uddharaṇaṃ sādiyati, āpatti pārājikassa…pe… na sādiyati, anāpatti. Bhikkhupaccatthikā bhikkhuṃ manussitthiyā jāgarantiyā… suttāya… mattāya… ummattāya… pamattāya… matāya akkhāyitāya… matāya yebhuyyena akkhāyitāya…pe… āpatti pārājikassa. Matāya yebhuyyena khāyitāya santike ānetvā aṅgajātena vaccamaggaṃ… passāvamaggaṃ… mukhaṃ abhinisīdenti santhatassa asanthatāya, asanthatassa santhatāya, santhatassa santhatāya, asanthatassa asanthatāya. So ce pavesanaṃ sādiyati, paviṭṭhaṃ sādiyati, ṭhitaṃ sādiyati, uddharaṇaṃ sādiyati, āpatti thullaccayassa…pe… na sādiyati, anāpatti. Bhikkhupaccatthikā bhikkhuṃ amanussitthiyā… tiracchānagatitthiyā… manussubhatobyañjanakassa… amanussubhatobyañjanakassa… tiracchānagatubhatobyañjanakassa… manussapaṇḍakassa… amanussapaṇḍakassa… tiracchānagatapaṇḍakassa… manussapurisassa… amanussapurisassa… tiracchānagatapurisassa santike ānetvā aṅgajātena vaccamaggaṃ… mukhaṃ abhinisīdenti santhatassa asanthatassa, asanthatassa santhatassa, santhatassa santhatassa, asanthatassa asanthatassa. So ce pavesanaṃ sādiyati, paviṭṭhaṃ sādiyati, ṭhitaṃ sādiyati, uddharaṇaṃ sādiyati, āpatti pārājikassa…pe… na sādiyati, anāpatti.

[65] Bhikkhupaccatthikā bhikkhuṃ tiracchānagatapurisassa jāgarantassa… suttassa… mattassa… ummattassa… pamattassa… matassa akkhāyitassa… matassa yebhuyyena akkhāyitassa…pe… āpatti pārājikassa. Matassa yebhuyyena khāyitassa santike ānetvā aṅgajātena vaccamaggaṃ… mukhaṃ abhinisīdenti santhatassa asanthatassa, asanthatassa santhatassa, santhatassa santhatassa, asanthatassa asanthatassa. So ce pavesanaṃ sādiyati, paviṭṭhaṃ sādiyati, ṭhitaṃ sādiyati, uddharaṇaṃ sādiyati, āpatti thullaccayassa…pe… na sādiyati, anāpatti. Yathā bhikkhupaccatthikā vitthāritā, evaṃ vitthāretabbā. Rājapaccatthikā… corapaccatthikā… dhuttapaccatthikā… uppaḷagandhapaccatthikā. Saṃkhittaṃ.

[66] Maggena maggaṃ paveseti, āpatti pārājikassa. Maggena amaggaṃ paveseti, āpatti pārājikassa. Amaggena maggaṃ paveseti, āpatti pārājikassa. Amaggena amaggaṃ paveseti, āpatti thullaccayassa. Bhikkhu suttabhikkhumhi vippaṭipajjati; paṭibuddho sādiyati, ubho nāsetabbā. Paṭibuddho na sādiyati, dūsako nāsetabbo. Bhikkhu suttasāmaṇeramhi vippaṭipajjati; paṭibuddho sādiyati, ubho nāsetabbā. Paṭibuddho na sādiyati, dūsako nāsetabbo. Sāmaṇero suttabhikkhumhi vippaṭipajjati; paṭibuddho sādiyati, ubho nāsetabbā. Paṭibuddho na sādiyati, dūsako nāsetabbo. Sāmaṇero suttasāmaṇeramhi vippaṭipajjati; paṭibuddho sādiyati, ubho nāsetabbā. Paṭibuddho na sādiyati, dūsako nāsetabbo. Anāpatti ajānantassa, asādiyantassa, ummattakassa, khittacittassa, vedanāṭṭassa, ādikammikassāti.

[67] Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu makkaṭiyā methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi – ‘‘bhagavatā sikkhāpadaṃ paññattaṃ, kacci nu kho ahaṃ pārājikaṃ āpattiṃ āpanno’’ti? Bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocesi. ‘‘Āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā vesālikā vajjiputtakā bhikkhū sikkhaṃ apaccakkhāya dubbalyaṃ anāvikatvā methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭiseviṃsu. Tesaṃ kukkuccaṃ ahosi – ‘‘bhagavatā sikkhāpadaṃ paññattaṃ, kacci nu kho mayaṃ pārājikaṃ āpattiṃ āpannā’’ti? Bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocesuṃ. ‘‘Āpattiṃ tumhe, bhikkhave, āpannā pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu – ‘evaṃ me anāpatti bhavissatī’ti, gihiliṅgena methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi ‘‘bhagavatā sikkhāpadaṃ paññattaṃ, kacci nu kho ahaṃ pārājikaṃ āpattiṃ āpanno’’ti? Bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocesi. ‘‘Āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu – ‘evaṃ me anāpatti bhavissatī’ti, naggo hutvā methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu – ‘evaṃ me anāpatti bhavissatī’ti, kusacīraṃ nivāsetvā… vākacīraṃ nivāsetvā… phalakacīraṃ nivāsetvā… kesakambalaṃ nivāsetvā… vālakambalaṃ nivāsetvā… ulūkapakkhikaṃ nivāsetvā… ajinakkhipaṃ nivāsetvā methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro piṇḍacāriko bhikkhu pīṭhake nipannaṃ dārikaṃ passitvā sāratto aṅguṭṭhaṃ aṅgajātaṃ pavesesi. Sā kālamakāsi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhu, pārājikassa. Āpatti saṅghādisesassā’’ti.

[68] Tena kho pana samayena aññataro māṇavako uppalavaṇṇāya bhikkhuniyā paṭibaddhacitto hoti. Atha kho so māṇavako uppalavaṇṇāya bhikkhuniyā gāmaṃ piṇḍāya paviṭṭhāya kuṭikaṃ pavisitvā nilīno acchi. Uppalavaṇṇā bhikkhunī pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkantā pāde pakkhāletvā kuṭikaṃ pavisitvā mañcake nisīdi. Atha kho so māṇavako uppalavaṇṇaṃ bhikkhuniṃ uggahetvā dūsesi. Uppalavaṇṇā bhikkhunī bhikkhunīnaṃ etamatthaṃ ārocesi. Bhikkhuniyo bhikkhūnaṃ etamatthaṃ ārocesuṃ. Bhikkhū bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocesuṃ. ‘‘Anāpatti, bhikkhave, asādiyantiyā’’ti.

[69] Tena kho pana samayena aññatarassa bhikkhuno itthiliṅgaṃ pātubhūtaṃ hoti. Bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocesuṃ. ‘‘Anujānāmi, bhikkhave, taṃyeva upajjhaṃ tameva upasampadaṃ tāniyeva vassāni bhikkhunīhi saṅgamituṃ . Yā āpattiyo bhikkhūnaṃ bhikkhunīhi sādhāraṇā tā āpattiyo bhikkhunīnaṃ santike vuṭṭhātuṃ. Yā āpattiyo bhikkhūnaṃ bhikkhunīhi asādhāraṇā tāhi āpattīhi anāpattī’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena aññatarissā bhikkhuniyā purisaliṅgaṃ pātubhūtaṃ hoti. Bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocesuṃ. ‘‘Anujānāmi, bhikkhave, taṃyeva upajjhaṃ tameva upasampadaṃ tāniyeva vassāni bhikkhūhi saṅgamituṃ . Yā āpattiyo bhikkhunīnaṃ bhikkhūhi sādhāraṇā tā āpattiyo bhikkhūnaṃ santike vuṭṭhātuṃ. Yā āpattiyo bhikkhunīnaṃ bhikkhūhi asādhāraṇā tāhi āpattīhi anāpattī’’ti.

[70] Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu – ‘evaṃ me anāpatti bhavissatī’ti, mātuyā methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevi… dhītuyā methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevi… bhaginiyā methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevi… tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu purāṇadutiyikāya methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti.

[71] Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu mudupiṭṭhiko hoti. So anabhiratiyā pīḷito attano aṅgajātaṃ mukhena aggahesi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno parājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu lambī hoti. So anabhiratiyā pīḷito attano aṅgajātaṃ attano vaccamaggaṃ pavesesi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu matasarīraṃ passi. Tasmiñca sarīre aṅgajātasāmantā vaṇo hoti. So – ‘evaṃ me anāpatti bhavissatī’ti, aṅgajāte aṅgajātaṃ pavesetvā vaṇena nīhari. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu matasarīraṃ passi. Tasmiñca sarīre aṅgajātasāmantā vaṇo hoti. So – ‘evaṃ me anāpatti bhavissatī’ti, vaṇe aṅgajātaṃ pavesetvā aṅgajātena nīhari. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu sāratto lepacittassa nimittaṃ aṅgajātena chupi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhu, pārājikassa. Āpatti dukkaṭassā’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu sāratto dārudhītalikāya nimittaṃ aṅgajātena chupi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhu, pārājikassa. Āpatti dukkaṭassā’’ti.

[72] Tena kho pana samayena sundaro nāma bhikkhu rājagahā pabbajito rathikāya gacchati. Aññatarā itthī – ‘muhuttaṃ , bhante, āgamehi, vandissāmī’ti sā vandantī antaravāsakaṃ ukkhipitvā mukhena aṅgajātaṃ aggahesi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘sādiyi tvaṃ, bhikkhū’’ti? ‘‘Nāhaṃ, bhagavā, sādiyi’’nti. ‘‘Anāpatti, bhikkhu, asādiyantassā’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena aññatarā itthī bhikkhuṃ passitvā etadavoca – ‘‘ehi, bhante, methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevā’’ti. ‘‘Alaṃ, bhagini, netaṃ kappatī’’ti. ‘‘Ehi, bhante, ahaṃ vāyamissāmi, tvaṃ mā vāyami, evaṃ te anāpatti bhavissatī’’ti. So bhikkhu tathā akāsi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññatarā itthī bhikkhuṃ passitvā etadavoca – ‘‘ehi, bhante, methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevā’’ti. ‘‘Alaṃ, bhagini, netaṃ kappatī’’ti. ‘‘Ehi bhante, tvaṃ vāyama, ahaṃ na vāyamissāmi, evaṃ te anāpatti bhavissatī’’ti. So bhikkhu tathā akāsi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññatarā itthī bhikkhuṃ passitvā etadavoca – ‘‘ehi, bhante, methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevā’’ti. ‘‘Alaṃ, bhagini, netaṃ kappatī’’ti. ‘‘Ehi, bhante, abbhantaraṃ ghaṭṭetvā bahi mocehi…pe… bahi ghaṭṭetvā abbhantaraṃ mocehi, evaṃ te anāpatti bhavissatī’’ti. So bhikkhu tathā akāsi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti.

[73] Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu sivathikaṃ gantvā akkhāyitaṃ sarīraṃ passitvā tasmiṃ methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu sivathikaṃ gantvā yebhuyyena akkhāyitaṃ sarīraṃ passitvā tasmiṃ methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu sivathikaṃ gantvā yebhuyyena khāyitaṃ sarīraṃ passitvā tasmiṃ methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhu, pārājikassa. Āpatti thullaccayassā’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu sivathikaṃ gantvā chinnasīsaṃ passitvā vaṭṭakate mukhe chupantaṃ aṅgajātaṃ pavesesi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu sivathikaṃ gantvā chinnasīsaṃ passitvā vaṭṭakate mukhe acchupantaṃ aṅgajātaṃ pavesesi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhu, pārājikassa. Āpatti dukkaṭassā’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu aññatarissā itthiyā paṭibaddhacitto hoti. Sā kālaṅkatā susāne chaḍḍitā. Aṭṭhikāni vippakiṇṇāni honti. Atha kho so bhikkhu sivathikaṃ gantvā aṭṭhikāni saṅkaḍḍhitvā nimitte aṅgajātaṃ paṭipādesi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhu, pārājikassa. Āpatti dukkaṭassā’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu nāgiyā methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevi… yakkhiniyā methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevi… petiyā methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevi … paṇḍakassa methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu upahatindriyo hoti. So – ‘nāhaṃ vediyāmi sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā, anāpatti me bhavissatī’ti, methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevi. Bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocesuṃ. ‘‘Vedayi vā so, bhikkhave, moghapuriso na vā vedayi, āpatti pārājikassā’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu – ‘itthiyā methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevissāmī’ti, chupitamatte vippaṭisārī ahosi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhu, pārājikassa. Āpatti saṅghādisesassā’’ti.

[74] Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu bhaddiye jātiyāvane divāvihāragato nipanno hoti. Tassa aṅgamaṅgāni vātūpatthaddhāni honti. Aññatarā itthī passitvā aṅgajāte abhinisīditvā yāvadatthaṃ katvā pakkāmi. Bhikkhū kilinnaṃ passitvā bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocesuṃ. ‘‘Pañcahi, bhikkhave, ākārehi aṅgajātaṃ kammaniyaṃ hoti – rāgena, vaccena, passāvena, vātena, uccāliṅgapāṇakadaṭṭhena. Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahākārehi aṅgajātaṃ kammaniyaṃ hoti. Aṭṭhānametaṃ, bhikkhave, anavakāso yaṃ tassa bhikkhuno rāgena aṅgajātaṃ kammaniyaṃ assa. Arahaṃ so, bhikkhave, bhikkhu. Anāpatti, bhikkhave, tassa bhikkhuno’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu sāvatthiyā andhavane divāvihāragato nipanno hoti. Aññatarā gopālikā passitvā aṅgajāte abhinisīdi. So bhikkhu pavesanaṃ sādiyi, paviṭṭhaṃ sādiyi, ṭhitaṃ sādiyi, uddharaṇaṃ sādiyi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu sāvatthiyā andhavane divāvihāragato nipanno hoti. Aññatarā ajapālikā passitvā… aññatarā kaṭṭhahārikā passitvā… aññatarā gomayahārikā passitvā aṅgajāte abhinisīdi. So bhikkhu pavesanaṃ sādiyi, paviṭṭhaṃ sādiyi, ṭhitaṃ sādiyi, uddharaṇaṃ sādiyi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti.

[75] Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu vesāliyaṃ mahāvane divāvihāragato nipanno hoti. Aññatarā itthī passitvā aṅgajāte abhinisīditvā yāvadatthaṃ katvā sāmantā hasamānā ṭhitā hoti. So bhikkhu paṭibujjhitvā taṃ itthiṃ etadavoca – ‘‘tuyhidaṃ kamma’’nti? ‘‘Āma, mayhaṃ kamma’’nti. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘sādiyi tvaṃ, bhikkhū’’ti? ‘‘Nāhaṃ, bhagavā, jānāmī’’ti. ‘‘Anāpatti, bhikkhu, ajānantassā’’ti.

[76] Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu vesāliyaṃ mahāvane divāvihāragato rukkhaṃ apassāya nipanno hoti. Aññatarā itthī passitvā aṅgajāte abhinisīdi. So bhikkhu sahasā vuṭṭhāsi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘sādiyi tvaṃ, bhikkhū’’ti? ‘‘Nāhaṃ, bhagavā, sādiyi’’nti. ‘‘Anāpatti, bhikkhu, asādiyantassā’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu vesāliyaṃ mahāvane divāvihāragato rukkhaṃ apassāya nipanno hoti. Aññatarā itthī passitvā aṅgajāte abhinisīdi. So bhikkhu akkamitvā pavattesi . Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘sādiyi tvaṃ, bhikkhū’’ti? ‘‘Nāhaṃ, bhagavā, sādiyi’’nti. ‘‘Anāpatti, bhikkhu, asādiyantassā’’ti.

[77] Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu vesāliyaṃ mahāvane kūṭāgārasālāyaṃ divāvihāragato dvāraṃ vivaritvā nipanno hoti. Tassa aṅgamaṅgāni vātūpatthaddhāni honti. Tena kho pana samayena sambahulā itthiyo gandhañca mālañca ādāya ārāmaṃ āgamaṃsu vihārapekkhikāyo. Atha kho tā itthiyo taṃ bhikkhuṃ passitvā aṅgajāte abhinisīditvā yāvadatthaṃ katvā, purisūsabho vatāyanti vatvā gandhañca mālañca āropetvā pakkamiṃsu. Bhikkhū kilinnaṃ passitvā bhagavato etamatthaṃ ārocesuṃ. ‘‘Pañcahi, bhikkhave, ākārehi aṅgajātaṃ kammaniyaṃ hoti – rāgena, vaccena, passāvena, vātena, uccāliṅgapāṇakadaṭṭhena. Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahākārehi aṅgajātaṃ kammaniyaṃ hoti. Aṭṭhānametaṃ, bhikkhave, anavakāso, yaṃ tassa bhikkhuno rāgena aṅgajātaṃ kammaniyaṃ assa. Arahaṃ so, bhikkhave, bhikkhu. Anāpatti, bhikkhave, tassa bhikkhuno. Anujānāmi, bhikkhave, divā paṭisallīyantena dvāraṃ saṃvaritvā paṭisallīyitu’’nti.

[78] Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhārukacchako bhikkhu supinante purāṇadutiyikāya methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevitvā – ‘assamaṇo ahaṃ, vibbhamissāmī’ti, bhārukacchaṃ gacchanto antarāmagge āyasmantaṃ upāliṃ passitvā etamatthaṃ ārocesi. Āyasmā upāli evamāha – ‘‘anāpatti, āvuso, supinantenā’’ti. Tena kho pana samayena rājagahe supabbā nāma upāsikā mudhappasannā hoti. Sā evaṃdiṭṭhikā hoti – ‘‘yā methunaṃ dhammaṃ deti sā aggadānaṃ detī’’ti. Sā bhikkhuṃ passitvā etadavoca – ‘‘ehi, bhante, methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevā’’ti. ‘‘Alaṃ, bhagini, netaṃ kappatī’’ti. ‘‘Ehi, bhante, ūruntarikāya ghaṭṭehi, evaṃ te anāpatti bhavissatī’’ti…pe… ehi, bhante, nābhiyaṃ ghaṭṭehi… ehi, bhante, udaravaṭṭiyaṃ ghaṭṭehi… ehi, bhante, upakacchake ghaṭṭehi… ehi, bhante, gīvāyaṃ ghaṭṭehi… ehi, bhante, kaṇṇacchidde ghaṭṭehi… ehi, bhante, kesavaṭṭiyaṃ ghaṭṭehi… ehi, bhante, aṅgulantarikāya ghaṭṭehi… ‘‘ehi, bhante, hatthena upakkamitvā mocessāmi, evaṃ te anāpatti bhavissatī’’ti. So bhikkhu tathā akāsi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhu, pārājikassa. Āpatti saṅghādisesassā’’ti.

[79] Tena kho pana samayena sāvatthiyaṃ saddhā nāma upāsikā mudhappasannā hoti. Sā evaṃdiṭṭhikā hoti – ‘‘yā methunaṃ dhammaṃ deti sā aggadānaṃ detī’’ti. Sā bhikkhuṃ passitvā etadavoca – ‘‘ehi, bhante, methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭisevā’’ti. ‘‘Alaṃ, bhagini, netaṃ kappatī’’ti. ‘‘Ehi, bhante, ūruntarikāya ghaṭṭehi…pe… ehi, bhante, hatthena upakkamitvā mocessāmi, evaṃ te anāpatti bhavissatī’’ti. So bhikkhu tathā akāsi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘anāpatti, bhikkhu, pārājikassa. Āpatti saṅghādisesassā’’ti.

[80] Tena kho pana samayena vesāliyaṃ licchavikumārakā bhikkhuṃ gahetvā bhikkhuniyā vippaṭipādesuṃ… sikkhamānāya vippaṭipādesuṃ… sāmaṇeriyā vippaṭipādesuṃ. Ubho sādiyiṃsu. Ubho nāsetabbā. Ubho na sādiyiṃsu. Ubhinnaṃ anāpatti.

[81] Tena kho pana samayena vesāliyaṃ licchavikumārakā bhikkhuṃ gahetvā vesiyā vippaṭipādesuṃ… paṇḍake vippaṭipādesuṃ… gihiniyā vippaṭipādesuṃ. Bhikkhu sādiyi. Bhikkhu nāsetabbo. Bhikkhu na sādiyi. Bhikkhussa anāpatti. Tena kho pana samayena vesāliyaṃ licchavikumārakā bhikkhū gahetvā aññamaññaṃ vippaṭipādesuṃ. Ubho sādiyiṃsu. Ubho nāsetabbā. Ubho na sādiyiṃsu. Ubhinnaṃ anāpatti.

[82] Tena kho pana samayena aññataro vuḍḍhapabbajito bhikkhu purāṇadutiyikāya dassanaṃ agamāsi. Sā – ‘ehi, bhante, vibbhamā’ti aggahesi. So bhikkhu paṭikkamanto uttāno paripati. Sā ubbhajitvā aṅgajāte abhinisīdi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi …pe… ‘‘sādiyi tvaṃ, bhikkhū’’ti? ‘‘Nāhaṃ, bhagavā, sādiyi’’nti. ‘‘Anāpatti, bhikkhu, asādiyantassā’’ti.

[83] Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu araññe viharati. Migapotako tassa passāvaṭṭhānaṃ āgantvā passāvaṃ pivanto mukhena aṅgajātaṃ aggahesi. So bhikkhu sādiyi. Tassa kukkuccaṃ ahosi…pe… ‘‘āpattiṃ tvaṃ, bhikkhu, āpanno pārājika’’nti.
